IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Relativism

BEFORE

Early 5th century BCE Parmenides argues that we can rely more on reason than the evidence of our senses.

AFTER

Early 4th century BCE Plato’s theory of Forms states that there are “absolutes” or ideal forms of everything.

1580 French writer Michel de Montaigne espouses a form of relativism to describe human behavior in his Essays.

1967–72 Jacques Derrida uses his technique of deconstruction to show that any text contains irreconcilable contradictions.

2005 Benedict XVI warns “we are moving towards a dictatorship of relativism” in his first public address as pope.

During the 5th century BCE, Athens evolved into an important and prosperous city-state, and under the leadership of Pericles (445–429 BCE) it entered a “Golden Age” of scholarship and culture. This attracted people from all parts of Greece, and for those who knew and could interpret the law, there were rich pickings to be had. The city was run on broadly democratic principles, with an established legal system. Anyone taken to court was required to plead his own case; there were no advocates, but a recognized class of advisors soon evolved. Among this group was Protagoras.

Everything is relative

Protagoras lectured in law and rhetoric to anybody who could afford him. His teachings were essentially about practical matters, arguing to win a civil case rather than to prove a point, but he could see the philosophical implications of what he taught. For Protagoras, every argument has two sides, and both may be equally valid. He claims that he can “make the worse case the better”, proving not the worth of the argument, but the persuasiveness of its proponent. In this way, he recognizes that belief is subjective, and it is the man holding the view or opinion that is the measure of its worth. This style of reasoning, common in law and politics at that time, was new to philosophy. By placing human beings at its center, it continued a tradition of taking religion out of philosophical argument, and it also shifted the focus of philosophy away from an understanding of the nature of the universe to an examination of human behavior. Protagoras is mainly interested in practical questions. Philosophical speculations on the substance of the cosmos or about the existence of the gods seem pointless to him, as he considers such things to be ultimately unknowable.

The main implication of “man is the measure of all things” is that belief is subjective and relative. This leads Protagoras to reject the existence of absolute definitions of truth, justice, or virtue. What is true for one person may be false for another, he claims. This relativism also applies to moral values, such as what is right and what is wrong. To Protagoras, nothing is inherently good in itself. Something is ethical, or right, only because a person or society judges it to be so.

Protagoras was the most influential of a group of itinerant teachers of law and rhetoric that became known as the Sophists (from the Greek sophia, meaning wisdom). Socrates and Plato derided the Sophists as mere rhetoricians, but with Protagoras there was a significant step in ethics toward the view that there are no absolutes and that all judgements, including moral judgements, are subjective.

"Many things prevent knowledge, including the obscurity of the subject and the brevity of human life."

Protagoras

According to Protagoras, any “truth” uncovered by these two philosophers, depicted on a 5th-century BCE Greek drinking vessel, will depend on their use of rhetoric and their debating skill.

PROTAGORAS

Protagoras was born in Abdera, in northeast Greece, but traveled widely as an itinerant teacher. At some stage, he moved to Athens, where he became advisor to the ruler of the city-state, Pericles, who commissioned him to write the constitution for the colony of Thurii in 444 BCE. Protagoras was a proponent of agnosticism, and legend has it that he was later tried for impiety, and that his books were publicly burned.

Only fragments of his writings survive, although Plato discusses the views of Protagoras at length in his dialogues.

Protagoras is believed to have lived to the age of 70, but his exact date and place of death are unknown.

Key works

5th century BCE

On the Gods

Truth

On Being

The Art of Controversy

On Mathematics

On the State

On Ambition

On Virtues

On the Original State of Things

See also: Parmenides • Socrates • Plato • Michel de Montaigne • Jacques Derrida
