IN CONTEXT

TRADITION

Chinese philosophy

APPROACH

Mohism

BEFORE

6th century BCE Laozi states that to live according to the dao means acting intuitively and in accordance with nature.

Late 6th century BCE Confucius’s moral philosophy stresses the importance of family ties and traditions.

AFTER

Mid-4th century BCE The Confucian philosophy of Mencius stresses man’s innate goodness.

Mid-4th century BCE Daoist philosopher Zhuangzi criticizes Confucianism and Mohism.

3rd century BCE Legalism is adopted by the Qin dynasty. It opposes Mohism, advocating strong laws to keep man’s essentially evil nature in check.

Born in about 470 BCE, shortly after the death of Confucius, Mozi had a traditional Chinese education based on the classic texts. Later, however, he came to dislike the emphasis on clan relationships that runs through Confucianism, and this led him to set up his own school of thought, advocating universal love or jian ai. By jian ai, Mozi means that we should care for all people equally, regardless of their status or their relationship to us. He regards this philosophy, which became known as Mohism and which “nourishes and sustains all life”, as being fundamentally benevolent and in accordance with the way of heaven.

Mozi believes that there is always reciprocity in our actions. By treating others as we would wish to be treated ourselves, we will receive similar treatment in return. This is the meaning behind “when one throws to me a peach, I return to him a plum.” When this principle of caring for everyone impartially is applied by rulers, Mozi states that it avoids conflict and war; when the same principle is practiced by everyone, it leads to a more harmonious and therefore more productive society. This idea is similar in spirit to that of the Utilitarianism proposed by Western philosophers of the 19th century.

Mao Zedong regarded Mozi as the true philosopher of the people, because of his humble origins. Mozi’s view that everyone should be treated equally has been encouraged in modern China.

See also: Laozi • Siddhartha Gautama • Confucius • Wang Bi • Jeremy Bentham • Hajime Tanabe
