IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

Late 5th century BCE Socrates states that seeking knowledge and truth is the key to a worthwhile life.

c.400 BCE Democritus and Leucippus conclude that the cosmos consists solely of atoms, moving in empty space.

AFTER

c.50 BCE Roman philosopher Lucretius writes De rerum natura, a poem exploring Epicurus’s ideas.

1789 Jeremy Bentham advocates the utilitarian idea of “the greatest happiness for the greatest number.”

1861 John Stuart Mill argues that intellectual and spiritual pleasures have more value than physical pleasures.

Epicurus grew up in a time when the philosophy of ancient Greece had already reached a pinnacle in the ideas of Plato and Aristotle. The main focus of philosophical thinking was shifting from metaphysics toward ethics—and also from political to personal ethics. Epicurus, however, found the seeds of a new school of thought in the quests of earlier philosophers, such as Socrates’ examination of the truth of basic human concepts and values.

Central to the philosophy that Epicurus developed is the view that peace of mind, or tranquillity, is the goal of life. He argues that pleasure and pain are the roots of good and evil, and qualities such as virtue and justice derive from these roots, as “it is impossible to live a pleasant life without living wisely, honorably, and justly, and it is impossible to live wisely, honorably, and justly without living pleasantly.” Epicurianism is often mistakenly interpreted as simply being about the pursuit of sensual pleasures. For Epicurus, the greatest pleasure is only attainable through knowledge and friendship, and a temperate life, with freedom from fear and pain.

Fear of death

One of the obstacles to enjoying the peace of a tranquil mind, Epicurus reasons, is the fear of death, and this fear is increased by the religious belief that if you incur the wrath of the gods, you will be severely punished in the afterlife. But rather than countering this fear by proposing an alternative state of immortality, Epicurus tries to explain the nature of death itself. He starts by proposing that when we die, we are unaware of our death, since our consciousness (our soul) ceases to exist at the point of death. To explain this, Epicurus takes the view that the entire universe consists of either atoms or empty space, as argued by the atomist philosophers Democritus and Leucippus. Epicurus then reasons that the soul could not be empty space, because it operates dynamically with the body, so it must be made up of atoms. He describes these atoms of the soul as being distributed around the body, but as being so fragile that they dissolve when we die, and so we are no longer capable of sensing anything. If you are unable to feel anything, mentally or physically, when you die, it is foolish to let the fear of death cause you pain while you are still alive.

Epicurus attracted a small but devoted following in his lifetime, but he was perceived as being dismissive of religion, which made him unpopular. His thinking was largely ignored by mainstream philosophy for centuries, but it resurfaced in the 18th century, in the ideas of Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill. In revolutionary politics, the tenets of Epicureanism are echoed in the words of the United States’ Declaration of Independence: “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.”

Terrifying images of the merciless god of death Thanatos were used to depict the pain and torment ancient Greeks might incur for their sins, both when they died and in the afterlife.

EPICURUS

Born to Athenian parents on the Aegean island of Samos, Epicurus was first taught philosophy by a disciple of Plato. In 323 BCE, Alexander the Great died and, in the political conflicts that followed, Epicurus and his family were forced to move to Colophon (now in Turkey). There he continued his studies with Nausiphanes, a follower of Democritus.

Epicurus taught briefly in Mytilene on the island of Lesbos, and in Lampsacus on the Greek mainland, before moving to Athens in 306 BCE. He founded a school, known as the The Garden, consisting of a community of friends and followers. There he set down in great detail the philosophy that was to become known as Epicureanism.

Despite frequent ill health, and often being in great pain, Epicurus lived to the age of 72. True to his beliefs, he described the last day of his life as a truly happy day.

Key works

Early 3rd century BCE On Nature Prinicipal Doctrines, Vatican Sayings

See: Democritus and Leucippus • Socrates • Plato • Aristotle • Jeremy Bentham • John Stuart Mill

IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

Late 5th century BCE Socrates teaches that the ideal life is one spent in search of truth.

Early 4th century BCE Socrates’ pupil Antisthenes advocates an ascetic life, lived in harmony with nature.

AFTER

c.301 BCE Influenced by Diogenes, Zeno of Citium founds a school of Stoics.

4th century CE St. Augustine of Hippo denounces the often shameless behavior of the Cynics, although they become the model for several ascetic Christian orders.

1882 Friedrich Nietzsche refers to Diogenes and his ideas in The Gay Science.

Plato once described Diogenes as “a Socrates gone mad.” Although this was meant as an insult, it is not far from the truth. Diogenes shares Socrates’ passion for virtue and rejection of material comfort, but takes these ideas to the extreme. He argues that in order to lead a good life, or one that is worth living, it is necessary to free oneself from the external restrictions imposed by society, and from the internal discontentment that is caused by desire, emotion, and fear. This can be achieved, he states, by being content to live a simple life, governed by reason and natural impulses, rejecting conventions without shame, and renouncing the desire for property and comfort.

Diogenes was the first of a group of thinkers who became known as the Cynics, a term taken from the Greek kunikos, meaning “dog-like.” It reflects the determination of the Cynics to spurn all forms of social custom and etiquette, and instead live in as natural a state as possible. They asserted that the more one can do this, as Diogenes himself did by living a life of poverty with only an abandoned tub for shelter, the nearer one will be to leading the ideal life.

The happiest person, who in Diogenes’ phrase, “has the most”, is therefore someone who lives in accordance with the rhythms of the natural world, free from the conventions and values of civilized society, and “content with the least.”

Rejecting worldly values, Diogenes chose to live on the streets. He flouted convention, by eating only discarded scraps and dressing—when he actually bothered to do so—in filthy rags.

See also: Socrates • Plato • Zeno of Citium • St. Augustine of Hippo • Friedrich Nietzsche
