IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

c.380 BCE Plato states his thoughts on ethics and the city-state in The Republic.

4th century BCE Diogenes of Sinope lives in extreme poverty to demonstrate his Cynic principles.

AFTER

c.40–45 CE Roman statesman and philosopher Seneca the Younger continues the Stoic tradition in his Dialogues.

c.150–180 Roman emperor Marcus Aurelius writes his 12-volume Meditations on Stoic philosophy.

1584 Flemish humanist Justus Lipsius writes De Constantia, combining Stoicism with Christianity to found a school of Neo-Stoicism.

Two main schools of philosophical thought emerged after Aristotle’s death. These were the hedonistic, godless ethic of Epicurus, which had limited appeal, and the more popular and longer-lasting Stoicism of Zeno of Citium.

Zeno studied with a disciple of Diogenes of Sinope, the Cynic, and shared his no-nonsense approach to life. He had little patience with metaphysical speculation and came to believe that the cosmos was governed by natural laws that were ordained by a supreme lawgiver. Man, he declares, is completely powerless to change this reality, and in addition to enjoying its many benefits, man also has to accept its cruelty and injustice.

Free will

However, Zeno also declares that man has been given a rational soul with which to exercise free will. No one is forced to pursue a “good” life. It is up to the individual to choose whether to put aside the things over which he has little or no control, and be indifferent to pain and pleasure, poverty and riches. But if a person does so, Zeno is convinced that he will achieve a life that is in harmony with nature in all its aspects, good or bad, and live in accordance with the rulings of the supreme lawgiver.

Stoicism was to find favor across much of Hellenistic Greece. But it drew in even more followers in the expanding Roman empire, where it flourished as a basis for ethics—both personal and political—until it was supplanted by Christianity in the 6th century.

"Happiness is a good flow of life."

Zeno of Citium

See also: Plato • Aristotle • Epicurus • Diogenes of Sinope
