IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Metaphysics

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

c.400 BCE Plato argues that mind and body are distinct substances.

4th century BCE Aristotle argues that mind is the “form” of the body.

c.800–950 CE Aristotle’s works are translated into Arabic for the first time.

AFTER

1250s–60s Thomas Aquinas adapts Aristotle’s account of the mind and body.

1640 René Descartes argues for dualism in his Meditations.

1949 Gilbert Ryle describes dualism as a “category mistake” in The Concept of Mind.

Avicenna, also known as Ibn Sînâ, is the most important philosopher in the Arabic tradition, and one of the world’s greatest thinkers. Like his predecessors, al-Kindî and al-Fârâbî, and his successor, Averroes, Avicenna self-consciously marked himself out as a philosopher rather than an Islamic theologian, choosing to follow Greek wisdom and the path of reasoning and proof. In particular, he saw himself as a follower of Aristotle, and his main writings are encyclopedias of Aristotelian philosophy.

However, these works explain Aristotle’s philosophy as re-thought and synthesized by Avicenna. On some doctrines, such as the idea that the universe has always existed, Avicenna kept to the Aristotelian view despite the fact that it clashed with Islamic orthodoxy, but in other areas he felt free to depart radically from Aristotle. One striking example is his explanation of the relationship between mind (self or soul) and body.

Mind and body are distinct

Aristotle claims that the body and mind of humans (and other animals) are not two different things (or “substances”), but one unit, and that the mind is the “form” of the human body. As such, it is responsible for all the activities a human being can perform, including thinking. For this reason Aristotle does not seem to think it possible for anything to survive the death of the body.

By contrast, Avicenna is one of the most famous “dualists” in the history of philosophy—he thinks that the body and the mind are two distinct substances. His great predecessor in this view was Plato, who thought of the mind as a distinct thing that was imprisoned in the body. Plato believed that at the point of death, the mind would be released from its prison, to be later reincarnated in another body.

In seeking to prove the divided nature of mind and body, Avicenna devised a thought-experiment known as the “Flying Man.” This appears as a treatise, On the Soul, within his Book of Healing, and it aims to strip away any knowledge that can possibly be disproved, and leave us only with absolute truths. It remarkably anticipates the much later work of Descartes, the famous dualist of the 17th century, who also decided to believe nothing at all except that which he himself could know for certain. Both Avicenna and Descartes want to demonstrate that the mind or self exists because it knows it exists; and that it is distinct from the human body.

The Flying Man

In the Flying Man experiment, Avicenna wants to examine what we can know if we are effectively robbed of our senses, and cannot depend on them for information. He asks us each to imagine this: suppose I have just come into existence, but I have all my normal intelligence. Suppose, too, that I am blindfolded and that I am floating in the air, and my limbs are separated from each other, so I can touch nothing. Suppose I am entirely without any sensations. None the less, I will be sure that I myself exist. But what is this self, which is me? It cannot be any of the parts of my body, because I do not know that I have any. The self that I affirm as existing does not have length or breadth or depth. It has no extension, or physicality. And, if I were able to imagine, for instance, a hand, I would not think that it belonged to this self which I know exists.

It follows from this that the human self—what I am—is distinct from my body, or anything physical. The Flying Man experiment, says Avicenna, is a way of alerting and reminding oneself of the existence of the mind as something other than, and distinct from, the body.

Avicenna also has other ways to show that the mind cannot be something material. Most are based on the fact that the type of intellectual knowledge the mind can grasp cannot not be contained by anything material. It is easy to see how the parts of physical, shaped things fit with the parts of a physical, shaped sense organ: the image of the wall that I see is stretched over the lens of my eye, each of its parts corresponding to a part of the lens. But the mind is not a sense organ; what it grasps are definitions, such as “Man is a rational, mortal animal.” The parts of this phrase need to be grasped at once, together. The mind therefore cannot be in any way like or part of the body.

Avicenna’s medical knowledge was so vast that it won him royal patronage. His Canon of Medicine influenced European schools of medicine until the mid-17th century.

"The secret conversation is a direct encounter between God and the soul, abstracted from all material constraints."

Avicenna

The immortal soul

Avicenna goes on to draw the conclusion that the mind is not destroyed when the body dies, and that it is immortal. This did not help to make his thinking more palatable to orthodox Muslims, who believe that the whole person, body and mind, is resurrected and enjoys the afterlife. Consequently, Avicenna was attacked in the 12th century by the great Islamic theologian al-Ghazâlî, who called him a heretic for abandoning the central Islamic tenet of the resurrection of the dead. But in the same century Avicenna’s work was also translated into Latin, and his dualism became popular among Christian philosophers and theologians. They liked the way his interpretations of Aristotle’s texts made them easily compatible with the idea of an immortal soul.

"But what is it that I am? A thinking thing."

René Descartes

The indubitable self

Some 200 years later, in the 1250s, Thomas Aquinas championed a more faithful interpretation of Aristotle, in which the mind and body are much more closely tied together, and his views were widely accepted by the theologians of the 16th and 17th centuries. But in 1640 Descartes returned to a dualism that was nearer to Plato’s than Aristotle’s, and his argument for it was very like Avicenna’s.

Descartes imagines that there is a demon who is trying to deceive him about everything on which he might possibly be deceived. The one thing that he cannot be deceived about, he realizes, is that he exists. This self is exactly the self which Avicenna’s Flying Man is sure of, when he has no other knowledge. Like Avicenna, Descartes can then conclude that the “I”, or self, is completely distinct from the body, and that it must be immortal.

The ghost in the machine

One very strong objection to the dualism of Avicenna or Descartes is the argument used by Aquinas. He says that the self which thinks is the same as the self which feels sensations in the body. For instance, I do not just observe that there is a pain in my leg, in the way that a sailor might notice a hole in his ship. The pain belongs to me as much as my thoughts about philosophy, or what I might have for lunch.

Most contemporary philosophers reject mind-body dualism, largely because of the increasing scientific knowledge of the brain. Avicenna and Descartes were both very interested in physiology and they produced scientific accounts of activities such as movement and sensation. But the process of rational thinking was inexplicable with the scientific tools of their times. We are now able to explain quite precisely how thinking goes on in different areas of the brain—though whether this means that we can explain thinking without reference to a self is not so clear. An influential 20th-century British philosopher, Gilbert Ryle, caricatured the dualists’ self as “a ghost in the machine”, and tried to show that we can explain how human beings perceive and function within the world without resorting to this “ghost” of a self.

Today philosophers are divided between a small number of dualists, a larger number of thinkers who say that the mind is simply a brain, and the majority, who agree that thinking is the result of the physical activity of the brain, but still insist there is a distinction between the physical states of the brain (the gray matter, the neurons, and so on), and the thinking which derives from them.

Many philosophers, especially continental European thinkers, still accept the results of Avicenna’s thought experiment in one central way. It shows, they say, that we each have a self with a first-person view of the world (the “I”) that cannot be accommodated by the objective view of scientific theories.

Philip Pullman’s tale, Northern Lights, picks up on the ancient Greek idea of a person’s soul, or daimon, being separate to the body, by presenting it as an entirely separate animal, such as a cat.

AVICENNA

Ibn Sînâ, or Avicenna as the Europeans called him, was born in 980 in a village near Bukhara, now in Uzbekhistan. Although he wrote mainly in Arabic, the language of learning throughout the Islamic world, he was a native Persian speaker. Avicenna was a child prodigy, rapidly surpassing his teachers not only in logic and philosophy, but also in medicine. While still in his teens, he became known to the Samanid ruler Nuh ibn Mansur as a brilliant physician, and was given the use of his magnificent library.

Avicenna’s life was spent in the service of various princes, both as physician and political adviser. He started writing at the age of 21, and went on to write more than 200 texts, on subjects as diverse as metaphysics, animal physiology, mechanics of solids, and Arabic syntax. He died when his medications for colic were altered, possibly maliciously, while on campaign with his patron Alâ al-Dawla.

Key works

c.1014–20 Book of Healing

c.1015 Canon of Medicine

c.1030 Pointers and Reminders

See also: Plato • Aristotle • Al-Kindî • Al-Fârâbî • Thomas Aquinas • René Descartes • Gilbert Ryle
