IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

c.400 CE St. Augustine of Hippo argues for God’s existence through our grasp of unchanging truths.

1075 In his Monologion, Anselm develops Augustine’s proof of God’s existence.

AFTER

1260s Thomas Aquinas rejects Anselm’s Ontological Argument.

1640 René Descartes uses a form of Anselm’s Ontological Argument in his Meditations.

1979 American philosopher Alvin Plantinga reformulates Anselm’s Ontological Argument using a form of modal logic to establish its truth.

Although Christian thinkers believe as a matter of faith that God exists, in the Middle Ages they were keen to show that God’s existence could also be proved by rational argument. The Ontological Argument invented by Anselm—an 11th-century Italian philosopher who worked on the basis of Aristotelian logic, Platonic thinking, and his own genius—is probably the most famous of all.

Anselm imagines himself arguing with a Fool, who denies that God exists. The argument rests on an acceptance of two things: first, that God is “that than which nothing greater can be thought”, and second, that existence is superior to non-existence. By the end of the argument the Fool is forced to either take up a self-contradictory position or admit that God exists.

The argument has been accepted by many great philosophers, such as René Descartes and Baruch Spinoza. But there have been many others who took up the Fool’s side. One contemporary of Anselm’s, Gaunilo of Marmoutiers, said that we could use the same argument to prove that there exists somewhere a marvellous island, greater than any island that can be thought. In the 18th century Immanuel Kant objected that the argument treats existence as if it were an attribute of things—as if I might describe my jacket like this: “it’s green, made of tweed, and it exists.” Existing is not like being green: if it did not exist, there would be no jacket to be green or tweed.

Kant holds that Anselm is also wrong to say that what exists in reality as well as in the mind is greater than what exists in the mind alone, but other philosophers disagree. Is there not a sense in which a real painting is greater than the mental concept the painter has before he starts work?

"We believe that You [God] are that than which nothing greater can be thought."

St. Anselm

Anselm’s Ontological Argument was written in 1077–78, but acquired its title from the German philosopher Kant in 1781.

ST ANSELM

St Anselm of Canterbury was born in Aosta in Italy in 1033. He left home in his twenties to study at the monastery of Bec, in France, under an eminent logician, grammarian, and Biblical commentator named Lanfranc. Anselm became a monk of Bec in 1060, then prior, and eventually abbot in 1078. He travelled to England, and in 1093 was made Archbishop of Canterbury, despite his protestations of ill-health and lack of political skills. This position put him in conflict with the Anglo-Norman kings William II and Henry I, as he tried to uphold the Church against royal power. These disputes led to two periods of exile from England for Anselm, during which he visited the pope to plead the case for the English Church and his own removal from office. Ultimately reconciled with King Henry I, Anselm died in Canterbury aged 76.

Key works

1075–76 Monologion

1077–78 Proslogion

1095–98 Why did God become Man?

1080–86 On the Fall of the Devil

See also: Plato • St. Augustine of Hippo • Thomas Aquinas • René Descartes • Benedictus Spinoza
