IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

1090s Abû Hâmid al-Ghazâlî launches an attack on Islamic Aristotelian philosophers.

1120s Ibn Bâjja (Avempace) establishes Aristotelian philosophy in Islamic Spain.

AFTER

1270 Thomas Aquinas criticizes the Averroists for accepting conflicting truths from Christianity and Aristotelian philosophy.

1340s Moses of Narbonne publishes commentaries on Averroes’ work.

1852 French philosopher Ernest Renan publishes a study of Averroes, on the basis of which he becomes an important influence on modern Islamic political thought.

Averroes worked in the legal profession; he was a qâdî (an Islamic judge) who worked under the Almohads, one of the strictest Islamic regimes in the Middle Ages. Yet he spent his nights writing commentaries on the work of an ancient pagan philosopher, Aristotle—and one of Averroes’ avid readers was none other than the Almohad ruler, Abû Yacqûb Yûsuf.

Averroes reconciles religion and philosophy through a hierarchical theory of society. He thinks that only the educated elite are capable of thinking philosophically, and everyone else should be obliged to accept the teaching of the Qur’an literally. Averroes does not think that the Qur’an provides a completely accurate account of the universe if read in this literal way, but says that it is a poetic approximation of the truth, and this is the most that the uneducated can grasp.

However, Averroes believes that educated people have a religious obligation to use philosophical reasoning. Whenever reasoning shows the literal meaning of the Qur’an to be false, Averroes says that the text must be “interpreted”; that is to say the obvious meaning of the words should be disregarded and the scientific theory demonstrated by Aristotelian philosophy accepted in its place.

"Philosophers believe that religious laws are necessary political arts."

Averroes

The immortal intellect

Averroes is willing to sacrifice some widely-held Islamic doctrines in order to maintain the compatibility of philosophy and religion. For instance, almost all Muslims believe that the universe has a beginning, but Averroes agrees with Aristotle that it has always existed, and says that there is nothing in the Qur’an to contradict this view. However, the resurrection of the dead, a basic tenet of Islam, is harder to include within an Aristotelian universe. Averroes accepts that we must believe in personal immortality, and that anyone who denies this is a heretic who should be executed. But he takes a different position from his predecessors by saying that Aristotle’s treatise On the Soul does not state that individual humans have immortal souls. According to Averroes’ interpretation, Aristotle claims that humanity is immortal only through a shared intellect. Averroes seems to be saying that there are truths discoverable by humans that hold good for ever, but that you and I as individuals will perish when our bodies die.

Later Averroists

Averroes’ advocacy of Aristotelian philosophy (if only for the elite) was shunned by his fellow Muslims. But his works, translated into Hebrew and Latin, had enormous influence in the 13th and 14th centuries. Scholars who supported the opinions of Aristotle and Averroes became known as Averroists, and they included Jewish scholars such as Moses of Narbonne, and Latin scholars such as Boethius of Dacia and Siger of Brabant. The Latin Averroists acccepted Aristotle as interpreted by Averroes as the truth according to reason—despite also affirming an apparently conflicting set of Christian “truths.” They have been described as advocating a “double truth” theory, but their view is rather that truth is relative to the context of enquiry.

Some Muslims did not view philosophy as a legitimate subject for study in the 12th century, but Averroes argued that it was essential to engage with religion critically and philosophically.

AVERROES

Ibn Rushd, known in Europe as Averroes, was born in 1126 in Cordoba, then part of Islamic Spain. He belonged to a family of distinguished lawyers and trained in law, science, and philosophy. His friendship with another doctor and philosopher, Ibn Tufayl, led to an introduction to the Caliph Abû Yacqûb Yûsuf, who appointed Averroes chief judge and later court physician. Abû Yacqûb also shared Averroes’ interest in Aristotle, and commissioned him to write a series of paraphrases of all Aristotle’s works, designed for non-specialists such as himself. Despite the increasingly liberal views of the Almohads, the public disapproved of Averroes’ unorthodox philosophy, and public pressure led to a banning of his books and personal exile in 1195. Reprieved two years later, Averroes returned to Cordoba but died the following year.

Key works

1179–80 Decisive Treatise

1179–80 The Incoherence of the Incoherence

c.1186 Great Commentary on Aristotle’s ‘On the Soul’

See also: Plato • Aristotle • Al-Ghazâlî • Ibn Bâjja • Thomas Aquinas • Moses of Narbonne
