IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

c.400 CE The philosopher Pseudo-Dionysius establishes the tradition of Christian negative theology, which states that God is not being, but more than being.

860s John Scotus Eriugena suggests that God creates the universe from the nothing which is himself.

AFTER

1260s Thomas Aquinas moderates Maimonides’ negative theology in his Summa Theologiae.

Early 1300s Meister Eckhart develops his negative theology.

1840–50s Søren Kierkegaard claims that it is impossible to provide any form of external description of God.

Maimonides wrote on both Jewish law (in Hebrew) and Aristotelian thought (in Arabic). In both areas, one of his central concerns was to guard against anthropomorphizing God, which is the tendency to think about God in the same way as a human being. For Maimonides, the worst mistake of all is to take the Torah (the first part of the Hebrew Bible) as literal truth, and to think that God is a bodily thing. Anyone who thinks this, he says, should be excluded from the Jewish community. But in the Guide of the Perplexed, Maimonides pushes this idea to its farthest extent, developing a strand of thought known as “negative theology.” This already existed in Christian theology, and it focuses on describing God only in terms of what God is not.

God, Maimonides says, has no attributes. We cannot rightly say that God is “good” or “powerful.” This is because an attribute is either accidental (capable of change) or essential. One of my accidental attributes, for example, is that I am sitting; others are that I have gray hair and a long nose. But I would still be what I essentially am even if I were standing, red-haired, and had a snub-nose. Being human—that is, being a rational, mortal animal—is my essential attribute: it defines me. God, it is generally agreed, has no accidental attributes, because God is unchanging. In addition, says Maimonides, God cannot have any essential attributes either, because they would be defining, and God cannot be defined. So God has no attributes at all.

Speaking about God

Maimondes claims that we can say things about God, but they must be understood as telling us about God’s actions, rather than God’s being. Most discussions in the Torah should be understood in this way. So when we are told that “God is a creator”, we must understand this as stating what God does, rather than the sort of thing God is. If we were to consider the sentence “John is a writer”, we might normally take it to mean that being a writer is John’s profession. But Maimonides asks us to consider only what has been done: in this instance John has written words. The writing has been brought about by John but it does not tell us anything about him.

Maimonides also accepts that statements which seem to attribute qualities to God can be understood if they are taken as double negatives. “God is powerful”: should be taken to mean that God is not powerless. Imagine a game in which I think of a thing and tell you what it is not (it is not large, it is not red…) until you guess what it is. The difference in the case of God is that we have only the negations to guide us: we cannot say what God is.

The Mishneh Torah was a complete restatement of Jewish Oral Law, which Maimonides wrote in plain Hebrew so that “young and old” could know and understand all the Jewish observances.

"When the intellects contemplate God’s essence, their apprehension turns into incapacity."

Maimonides

MOSES MAIMONIDES

Moses Maimonides (also known as Rambam) was born in 1135 in Cordoba, Spain, into a Jewish family. His childhood was rich in cross-cultural influences: he was educated in both Hebrew and Arabic, and his father, a rabbinic judge, taught him Jewish law within the context of Islamic Spain. His family fled Spain when the Berber Almohad dynasty came to power in 1148, and lived nomadically for 10 years until they settled first in Fez (now in Morocco) and then Cairo. The family’s financial problems led Maimonides to train as a physician, and his skill led to a royal appointment within only a few years. He also worked as a rabbinic judge, but this was an activity for which he thought it wrong to accept any payment. He was recognized as head of the Jewish community of Cairo in 1191, and after his death his tomb became a place of Jewish pilgrimage.

Key works

1168 Commentary on the Mishna

1168–78 Mishneh Torah

1190 Guide of the Perplexed

See also: Johannes Scotus Eriugena • Thomas Aquinas • Meister Eckhart • Søren Kierkegaard
