IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Epistemology

BEFORE

4th century BCE Aristotle, in his Nicomachean Ethics, argues that to be virtuous, a person must be sociable and form close relationships with others; only a bestial man or a god can flourish alone.

AFTER

Late 18th century Anglican evangelical clergyman Richard Cecil states, “Solitude shows us what we should be; society shows us what we are.”

Late 19th century Friedrich Nietzsche describes solitude as necessary to the task of self-examination, which he claims can alone free humans from the temptation just to thoughtlessly follow the mob.

In his essay “On Solitude” (from the first volume of his Essays), Montaigne takes up a theme that has been popular since ancient times: the intellectual and moral dangers of living among others, and the value of solitude. Montaigne is not stressing the importance of physical solitude, but rather of developing the ability to resist the temptation to mindlessly fall in with the opinion and actions of the mob. He compares our desire for the approval of our fellow humans to being overly attached to material wealth and possessions. Both passions diminish us, Montaigne claims, but he does not conclude that we should relinquish either, only that we should cultivate a detachment from them. By doing so, we may enjoy them—and even benefit from them—but we will not become emotionally enslaved to them, or devastated if we lose them.

“On Solitude” then considers how our desire for mass approval is linked to the pursuit of glory, or fame. Contrary to thinkers such as Niccolò Machiavelli, who see glory as a worthy goal, Montaigne believes that constant striving for fame is the greatest barrier to peace of mind, or tranquility. He says of those who present glory as a desirable goal that they “only have their arms and legs out of the crowd; their souls, their wills, are more engaged with it than ever.”

Montaigne is not concerned with whether or not we achieve glory. His point is that we should shake off the desire for glory in the eyes of other people—that we should not always think of other people’s approval and admiration as being valuable. He goes on to recommend that instead of looking for the approbation of those around us, we should imagine that some truly great and noble being is constantly with us, able to observe our most private thoughts, a being in whose presence even the mad would hide their failings. By doing this, we will learn to think clearly and objectively and behave in a more thoughtful and rational manner. Montaigne claims that caring too much about the opinion of those around us will corrupt us, either because we end up imitating those who are evil, or become so consumed by hatred for them that we lose our reason.

Montaigne experienced the results of mindless mob violence during the French Wars of Religion (1562–98), including the atrocities of the St. Bartholomew Day Massacre of 1572.

Glory’s pitfalls

Montaigne returns to his attack on the pursuit of glory in his later writings, pointing out that the acquisition of glory is often so much a matter of mere chance that it makes little sense to hold it in such reverence. “Many times I’ve seen [fortune] stepping out ahead of merit, and often a long way ahead,” he writes. He also points out that encouraging statesmen and political leaders to value glory above all things, as Machiavelli does, merely teaches them never to attempt any endeavor unless an approving audience is on hand, ready and eager to bear witness to the remarkable nature of their powers and achievements.

"Contagion is very dangerous in crowds. You must either imitate the vicious or hate them."

Michel de Montaigne

MICHEL DE MONTAIGNE

Michel Eyquem de Montaigne was born and brought up in his wealthy family’s chateau near Bordeaux. However, he was sent to live with a poor peasant family until the age of three, so that he would be familiar with the life led by the ordinary workers. He received all his education at home, and was allowed to speak only Latin until the age of six. French was effectively his second language.

From 1557, Montaigne spent 13 years as a member of his local parliament, but resigned in 1571, on inheriting the family estates.

Montaigne published his first volume of Essays in 1580, going on to write two more volumes before his death in 1592. In 1580, he also set out on an extensive tour of Europe, partly to seek a cure for kidney stones. He returned to politics in 1581, when he was elected Mayor of Bordeaux, an office he held until 1585.

Key works

1569 In Defence of Raymond Sebond

1580–1581 Travel Journal

1580, 1588, 1595 Essays (3 volumes)

See also: Aristotle • Niccolò Machiavelli • Friedrich Nietzsche
