IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Empiricism

BEFORE

c.380 BCE In his dialogue, Meno, Plato argues that we remember knowledge from previous lives.

Mid-13th century Thomas Aquinas puts forward the principle that “whatever is in our intellect must have previously been in the senses.”

AFTER

Late 17th century Gottfried Leibniz argues that the mind may seem to be a tabula rasa at birth, but contains innate, underlying knowledge, which experience gradually uncovers.

1966 Noam Chomsky, in Cartesian Linguistics, sets out his theory of innate grammar.

John Locke is traditionally included in the group of philosophers known as the British Empiricists, together with two later philosophers, George Berkeley and David Hume. The empiricists are generally thought to hold the view that all human knowledge must come directly or indirectly from the experience of the world that we acquire through the use of our senses alone. This contrasts with the thinking of the rationalist philosophers, such as René Descartes, Benedictus Spinoza, and Gottfried Leibniz, who hold that in principle, at least, it is possible to acquire knowledge solely through the use of reason.

In fact, the division between these two groups is not as clear-cut as is often assumed. The rationalists all accept that in practice our knowledge of the world ultimately stems from our experience, and most notably from scientific enquiry. Locke reaches his distinctive views concerning the nature of the world by applying a process of reasoning later known as abduction (inference to the best explanation from the available evidence) to the facts of sensory experience. For example, Locke sets out to demonstrate that the best explanation of the world as we experience it is corpuscular theory. This is the theory that everything in the world is made up of submicroscopic particles, or corpuscles, which we can have no direct knowledge of, but which, by their very existence, make sense of phenomena that would otherwise be difficult or impossible to explain. Corpuscular theory was becoming popular in 17th-century scientific thinking and is fundamental to Locke’s view of the physical world.

Innate ideas

The claim that man’s knowledge cannot go beyond his experience may therefore seem inappropriate, or at least an exaggeration, when attributed to Locke. However, Locke does argue at some length, in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, against the theory proposed by the rationalists to explain how knowledge could be accessed without experience. This is the theory of innate ideas.

The concept that human beings are born with innate ideas, and that these can give us knowledge about the nature of the world around us, independently of anything we may experience, dates back to the dawn of philosophy. Plato had developed a concept, according to which all genuine knowledge is essentially located within us, but that when we die our souls are reincarnated into new bodies and the shock of birth causes us to forget it all. Education is therefore not about learning new facts, but about “unforgetting”, and the educator is not a teacher but a midwife.

However, many later thinkers countered Plato’s theory, proposing that all knowledge cannot be innate and that only a limited number of concepts can be. These include the concept of God and also that of a perfect geometric structure, such as an equilateral triangle. This type of knowledge, in their view, can be gained without any direct sensory experience, in the way that it is possible to devise a mathematical formula by using nothing more than the powers of reason and logic. René Descartes, for example, declares that although he believes that we all have an idea of God imprinted in us—like the mark that a craftsman makes in the clay of a pot—this knowledge of God’s existence can only be brought into our conscious mind through a process of reasoning.

"If we attentively consider newborn children, we shall have little reason to think that they bring many ideas into the world with them."

John Locke

Locke’s objections

Locke was against the idea that human beings possess any kind of innate knowledge. He takes the view that the mind at birth is a tabula rasa—a blank tablet or a new sheet of paper upon which experience writes, in the same way that light can create images on photographic film. According to Locke, we bring nothing to the process except the basic human ability to apply reason to the information that we gather through our senses. He argues that there is not the slightest empirical evidence to suggest that the minds of infants are other than blank at birth, and adds that this is also true of the minds of the mentally deficient, stating that “they have not the least apprehension or thought of them.” Locke, therefore, declares that any doctrine supporting the existence of innate ideas must be false.

Locke also goes on to attack the very notion of innate ideas by arguing that it is incoherent. In order for something to be an idea at all, he states that it has to have been present at some point in somebody’s mind. But, as Locke points out, any idea that claims to be truly innate must also be claiming to precede any form of human experience. Locke accepts that it is true, as Gottfried Leibniz states, that an idea may exist so deep in a person’s memory that for a time it is difficult or even impossible to recall, and so is not accessible to the conscious mind. Innate ideas, on the other hand, are believed to somehow exist somewhere, before the presence of any sort of mechanism that is capable of conceiving them and bringing them into consciousness.

The supporters of the existence of innate ideas often also argue that as such ideas are present in all human beings at birth, they must be by nature universal, which means that they are found in all human societies at all points in history. Plato, for example, claims that everyone potentially has access to the same basic body of knowledge, denying any difference in that respect between men and women, or between slaves and freemen. Similarly, in Locke’s time, the theory was frequently put forward that because innate ideas can only be placed in us by God, they must be universal, as God is not capable of being so unfair as to hand them out only to a select group of people.

Locke counters the argument for universal ideas by once again bringing to our attention that a simple examination of the world around us will readily show that they do not exist. Even if there were concepts, or ideas, which absolutely every human being in the world held in common, Locke argues that we would have no firm grounds for concluding that they were also innate. He declares that it would always be possible to discover other explanations for their universality, such as the fact that they stem from the most basic ways in which a human being experiences the world around him, which is something that we all must share.

In 1704, Gottfried Leibniz wrote a rebuttal of Locke’s empiricist arguments in his New Essays on the Human Understanding. Leibniz declares that innate ideas are the one clear way that we can gain knowledge that is not based upon sensory experience, and that Locke is wrong to deny their possibility. The debate about whether human beings can know anything beyond what they perceive through their five basic senses continues.

Locke believed the human mind is like a blank canvas, or tabula rasa, at birth. He states that all our knowledge of the world can only come from our experience, conveyed to us by our senses. We can then rationalize this knowledge to formulate new ideas.

"It seems to me a near contradiction to say that there are truths imprinted on the soul, which it perceives or understands not."

John Locke

Language as innate

Although Locke may reject the doctrine of innate ideas, he does not reject the concept that human beings have innate capacities. Indeed, the possession of capacities such as perception and reasoning are central to his accounts of the mechanism of human knowledge and understanding. In the late 20th century, the American philosophy Noam Chomsky took this idea further when he put forward his theory that there is an innate process of thinking in every human mind, which is capable of generating a universal “deep structure” of language. Chomsky believes that regardless of their apparent structural differences, all human languages have been generated from this common basis.

Locke played an important role in questioning how human beings acquire knowledge, at a time when man’s understanding of the world was expanding at an unprecedented rate. Earlier philosophers—notably the medieval Scholastic thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas—had concluded that some aspects of reality were beyond the grasp of the human mind. But Locke took this a stage further. By detailed analysis of man’s mental faculties, he sought to set down the exact limits of what is knowable.

"Let us then suppose the mind to be white paper, void of all characters, without any ideas; how comes it to be furnished?"

John Locke

As the mind is a blank canvas, or tabula rasa, at birth, Locke believes that anybody can be transformed by a good education, one that encourages rational thought and individual talents.

JOHN LOCKE

John Locke was born in 1632, the son of an English country lawyer. Thanks to wealthy patrons, he received a good education, first at Westminster School in London, then at Oxford. He was impressed with the empirical approach to science adopted by the pioneering chemist Robert Boyle, and he both promoted Boyle’s ideas and assisted in his experimental work.

Though Locke’s empiricist ideas are important, it was his political writing that made him famous. He proposed a social-contract theory of the legitimacy of government and the idea of natural rights to private property. Locke fled England twice, as a political exile, but returned in 1688, after the accession to the throne of William and Mary. He remained in England, writing as well as holding various government positions, until his death in 1704.

Key works

1689 A Letter Concerning Toleration

1690 An Essay Concerning Human Understanding

1690 Two Treatises of Government

See also: Plato • Thomas Aquinas • René Descartes • Benedictus Spinoza • Gottfried Leibniz • George Berkeley • David Hume • Noam Chomsky
