IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Scepticism

BEFORE

350 BCE Aristotle makes the first reference to a child’s mind as a “blank slate”, which later became known as a tabula rasa.

1690s John Locke argues that sense experience allows both children and adults to acquire reliable knowledge about the external world.

AFTER

1859 John Stuart Mill argues against assuming our own infallibility in On Liberty.

1900s Hans-Georg Gadamer and the postmodernists apply sceptical reasoning to all forms of knowledge, even that gained through empirical (sense-based) information.

Voltaire was a French intellectual who lived in the Age of Enlightenment. This period was characterized by an intense questioning of the world and how people live in it. European philosophers and writers turned their attention to the acknowledged authorities—such as the Church and state—to question their validity and their ideas, while also searching for new perspectives. Until the 17th century, Europeans had largely accepted the Church’s explanations of what, why, and how things existed, but both scientists and philosophers had begun to demonstrate different approaches to establishing the truth. In 1690 the philosopher John Locke had argued that no ideas were innate (known at birth), and that all ideas arise from experience alone. His argument was given further weight by scientist Isaac Newton whose experiments provided new ways of discovering truths about the world. It was against this background of rebellion against the accepted traditions that Voltaire pronounced that certainty is absurd.

Voltaire refutes the idea of certainty in two ways. First, he points out that apart from a few necessary truths of mathematics and logic, nearly every fact and theory in history has been revised at some point in time. So what appears to be “fact” is actually little more than a working hypothesis. Second, he agrees with Locke that there is no such thing as an innate idea, and points out that ideas we seem to know as true from birth may be only cultural, as these change from country to country.

Revolutionary doubt

Voltaire does not assert that there are no absolute truths, but he sees no means of reaching them. For this reason he thinks doubt is the only logical standpoint. Given that endless disagreement is therefore inevitable, Voltaire says that it is important to develop a system, such as science, to establish agreement.

In claiming that certainty is more pleasant than doubt, Voltaire hints at how much easier it is simply to accept authoritative statements—such as those issued by the monarchy or Church—than it is to challenge them and think for yourself. But Voltaire believes it is vitally important to doubt every “fact” and to challenge all authority. He holds that government should be limited but speech uncensored, and that science and education lead to material and moral progress. These were fundamental ideals of both the Enlightenment and the French Revolution, which took place 11 years after Voltaire’s death.

Scientific experiments during the Age of Enlightenment seemed to Voltaire to lead the way toward a better world, based on empirical evidence and unabashed curiosity.

VOLTAIRE

Voltaire was the pseudonym of the French writer and thinker, François Marie Arouet. He was born into a middle-class family in Paris, and was the youngest of three children. He studied law at university, but always preferred writing, and by 1715 was famous as a great literary wit. His satirical writing often landed him in trouble: he was imprisoned several times for insulting nobility, and was once exiled from France. This led to a stay in England, where he fell under the influence of English philosophy and science. After returning to France he became wealthy through speculation, and was thereafter able to devote himself to writing. He had several long and scandalous affairs, and travelled widely throughout Europe. In later life Voltaire campaigned vigorously for legal reform and against religious intolerance, in France and further afield.

Key works

1733 Philosophical Letters

1734 Treatise on Metaphysics

1759 Candide

1764 Philosophical Dictionary

See also: Aristotle • John Locke • David Hume • John Stuart Mill • Hans-Georg Gadamer • Karl Popper
