IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Conservatism

BEFORE

c.350 BCE Aristotle argues that society is like an organism, and that man is by nature a political animal.

5th century St. Augustine of Hippo argues that government is a form of punishment for “original sin.”

17th century Thomas Hobbes and John Locke develop the idea of the “social contract.”

AFTER

19th century French philosopher Joseph de Maistre points out the antidemocratic legacy of Burke since the French Revolution.

20th century British philosopher Michael Oakeshott develops a more liberal form of conservatism.

Many a disaffected person cries “It’s not my fault… blame society!” But the meaning of the word “society” is not entirely clear, and it has changed over time. During the 18th century, when the Irish philosopher and statesman Edmund Burke was writing, Europe was becoming increasingly commercialized, and the idea that society is a mutual agreement between its members—like a commercial company—was readily understood. However, this point of view also implies that it is only the material things in life that matter. Burke attempts to redress the balance by reminding us that human beings also enrich their lives through science, art, and virtue, and that while society is indeed a contract or partnership, it is not simply concerned with economics, or, as he puts it, “gross animal existence.” Society embodies the common good (our agreement on customs, norms, and values), but for Burke “society” means more than just the people living now—it also includes our ancestors and descendants. Moreover, because every political constitution is part of “the great primeval contract of eternal society”, God himself is society’s ultimate guarantor.

Burke’s view has the doctrine of original sin (the idea that we are born sinful) at its core, so he has little sympathy for anyone seeking to blame society for their conduct. Likewise, he dismisses the idea, proposed by John Locke, that we can be perfected by education—as though we are born innocent and merely need to be given the correct influences. For Burke, the fallibility of individual judgment is why we need tradition, to give us the moral bearings we need—an argument that echoes David Hume, who claimed that “custom is the great guide to human life.”

Tradition and change

Because society is an organic structure with roots stretching deep into the past, Burke believed its political organization should develop naturally over time. He opposed the idea of sweeping or abrupt political changes that cut through this natural process. For this reason he opposed the French Revolution of 1789, foreseeing its dangers long before the execution of the king and the year-long Reign of Terror. It also prompted him on several occasions to criticize Jean-Jacques Rousseau, whose book, The Social Contract, argued that the contract between citizens and the state can be broken at any time, depending on the will of the people. Another regular target for Burke was the English philosopher and scientist Joseph Priestley, who applauded the French Revolution and pilloried the idea of original sin.

Despite his scepticism about modern commercial society, Burke was a great defender of private property, and was optimistic about the free market. For this reason, he is often hailed as the “father of modern conservatism”—a philosophy that values both economic freedom and tradition. Today, even socialists would agree with Burke that private property is a fundamental social institution, but would disagree with him about its value. Likewise, ecologically-minded philosophers share his belief in the duties of one generation to the next, but with the new agenda of creating a “sustainable society.”

Burke condemned the French Revolution for its wholesale rejection of the past. He believed that change should occur gradually—an idea that became central to modern conservatism.

EDMUND BURKE

The Anglo-Irish politician Edmund Burke was born and educated in Dublin. From his youth onward, he was convinced that philosophy was useful training for politics, and in the 1750s he wrote notable essays on aesthetics and the origins of society. He served as an English MP from 1766 until 1794, and he was a prominent member of the Whig party—the more liberal of the two aristocratic parties of the day.

Burke was sympathetic toward the cause of American independence—which sparked a revolution that was entirely justified, in his view—and later became involved in the impeachment trial of Warren Hastings, the Governor-General of India. He remained a scathing critic of colonial malpractice for the rest of his life, and earned a reputation for being the conscience of the British Empire.

Key works

1756 A Vindication of Natural Society

1770 Thoughts on the Present Discontents

1790 Reflections on the Revolution in France

See also: John Locke • David Hume • Jean-Jacques Rousseau • Adam Smith • John Rawls
