IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Metaphysics

APPROACH

Idealism

BEFORE

1690 John Locke publishes An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, explaining how all our knowledge comes from experience.

1781 Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason introduces the concept of a “thing in itself”, which Schopenhauer used as a starting point for his ideas.

AFTER

Late 19th century Friedrich Nietzsche puts forward the notion of a “Will to power” to explain human motivations.

Early 20th century Austrian psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud explores what lies behind our basic human urges.

Arthur Schopenhauer was not part of the mainstream of early 19th-century German philosophy. He acknowledged Immanuel Kant, whom he idolized, as a major influence, but dismissed the idealists of his own generation, who held that reality ultimately consists of something nonmaterial. Most of all he detested the idealist Georg Hegel for his dry writing style and optimistic philosophy.

Using Kant’s metaphysics as his starting point, Schopenhauer developed his own view of the world, which he expressed in clear, literary language. He took Kant’s view that the world is divided into what we perceive through our senses (phenomena), and “things in themselves” (noumena), but he wanted to explain the nature of the phenomenal and noumenal worlds.

Interpreting Kant

According to Kant, we each construct a version of the world from our perceptions—the phenomenal world—but we can never experience the noumenal world as it is “in itself.” So we each have a limited vision of the world, as our perceptions are built from information acquired through a limited set of senses. Schopenhauer adds to this that “every man takes the limits of his own field of vision for the limits of the world.”

The idea of knowledge being limited to our experience was not an entirely new one; the ancient philosopher Empedocles had said that “each man believes only his experience”, and in the 17th century John Locke had asserted that “no man’s knowledge here can go beyond his experience.” But the reason Schopenhauer gives for this limitation is quite new, and it comes from his interpretation of Kant’s phenomenal and noumenal worlds. The important difference between Kant and Schopenhauer is that for Schopenhauer, the phenomenal and noumenal are not two different realities or worlds, but the same world, experienced differently. It is one world, with two aspects: Will and Representation. This is most easily evidenced by our bodies, which we experience in two ways: we perceive them as objects (Representations), and experience them from within (as Will).

Schopenhauer says that an act of will, such as wishing to raise my arm, and the resulting movement, are not in two different worlds—the noumenal and phenomenal—but the same event experienced in two different ways. One is experienced from inside, the other observed from outside. When we look at things outside ourselves, although we see only their objective Representation, not their inner reality or Will, the world as a whole still has the same simultaneous outer and inner existences.

A universal Will

Schopenhauer uses the word “will” to express a pure energy that has no driving direction, and yet is responsible for everything that manifests itself in the phenomenal world. He believes, like Kant, that space and time belong in the phenomenal world—they are concepts within our minds, not things outside of them—so the Will of the world does not mark time, or follow causal or spatial laws. This means it must be timeless and indivisible, and so must our individual wills. It follows, then, that the Will of the universe and individual will are one and the same thing, and the phenomenal world is controlled by this vast, timeless, motiveless Will.

Schopenhauer studied the Hindu Bhagavad Gita, in which Krishna the charioteer tells Arjuna that a man is a slave to his desires unless he can free himself from his cravings.

Eastern influence

At this point in his argument, Schopenhauer’s pessimism shows through. Where contemporaries such as Hegel saw will as a positive force, Schopenhauer sees humanity at the mercy of a mindless, aimless universal Will. It lies behind our most basic urges, he insists, and is what causes us to live lives of constant disappointment and frustration as we attempt to relieve our cravings. For Schopenhauer, the world is neither good nor bad, but meaningless, and humans who struggle to find happiness achieve at best gratification and at worst pain and suffering.

The only escape from this miserable condition, according to Schopenhauer, is nonexistence or at least a loss of will for gratification. He proposes that relief can be found through aesthetic contemplation, especially in music, which is the one art that does not attempt to represent the phenomenal world. Schopenhauer’s philosophy here echoes the Buddhist concept of nirvana (a transcendent state free from desire or suffering). He had studied Eastern thinkers and religions in great detail.

From his idea of one universal Will, Schopenhauer develops a moral philosophy that may be somewhat surprising, considering his otherwise misanthropic and pessimistic character. He realizes that if we can recognize that our separateness from the universe is essentially an illusion—because all our individual wills and the Will of the universe are one and the same thing—we can learn empathy with everyone and everything else, and moral goodness can arise from a universal compassion. Here, again, Schopenhauer’s thinking reflects the ideals of Eastern philosophy.

"The fundament upon which all our knowledge and learning rests is the inexplicable."

Arthur Schopenhauer

Lasting legacy

Schopenhauer was largely ignored by other German philosophers in his lifetime, and his ideas were overshadowed by those of Hegel, though he did have an influence on writers and musicians. Toward the end of the 19th century, the primacy he gave to Will became a theme in philosophy once more. Friedrich Nietzsche in particular acknowledged his influence, and Henri Bergson and the American pragmatists also owe something to his analysis of the world as Will. Perhaps Schopenhauer’s greatest influence, however, was in the field of psychology, where his ideas about our basic urges and their frustration influenced the psychoanalytic theories of both Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung.

ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER

Born into a wealthy and cosmopolitan family in Danzig (now Gdansk), Schopenhauer was expected to become a merchant like his father. He travelled through France and England before his family settled in Hamburg in 1793. In 1805, after his father’s death—possibly by suicide—he felt able to stop working and go to university, where he studied philosophy and psychology. He maintained an uneasy relationship with his mother, who constantly criticized his achievements.

After completing his studies, Schopenhauer taught at Berlin University. He attained a reputation as a philanderer and misogynist; he had several affairs and avoided marriage, and was once convicted of assaulting a woman. In 1831 he moved to Frankfurt, where he lived until his death with a succession of poodles called either Atman (“soul” in Hinduism and Buddhism) or Butz (German for hobgoblin).

Key works

1818 and 1844 The World as Will and Representation

1851 Parerga and Paralipomena

See also: Empedocles • John Locke • Immanuel Kant • Georg Hegel • Friedrich Nietzsche
