IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Metaphysics

APPROACH

Existentialism

BEFORE

1788 Immanuel Kant stresses the importance of freedom in moral philosophy in his Critique of Practical Reason.

1807–22 Georg Hegel suggests a historical consciousness, or Geist, establishing a relationship between human consciousness and the world in which it lives.

AFTER

1927 Martin Heidegger explores the concepts of Angst and existential guilt in his book Being and Time.

1938 Jean-Paul Sartre lays down the foundations of his existentialist philosophy.

1946 Ludwig Wittgenstein acknowledges Kierkegaard’s work in Culture and Value.

Søren Kierkegaard’s philosophy developed in reaction to the German idealist thinking that dominated continental Europe in the mid-19th century, particularly that of Georg Hegel. Kierkegaard wanted to refute Hegel’s idea of a complete philosophical system, which defined humankind as part of an inevitable historical development, by arguing for a more subjective approach. He wants to examine what “it means to be a human being”, not as part of some great philosophical system, but as a self-determining individual.

Kierkegaard believes that our lives are determined by our actions, which are themselves determined by our choices, so how we make those choices is critical to our lives. Like Hegel, he sees moral decisions as a choice between the hedonistic (self-gratifying) and the ethical. But where Hegel thought this choice was largely determined by the historical and environmental conditions of our times, Kierkegaard believes that moral choices are absolutely free, and above all subjective. It is our will alone that determines our judgement, he says. However, far from being a reason for happiness, this complete freedom of choice provokes in us a feeling of anxiety or dread.

Kierkegaard explains this feeling in his book, The Concept of Anxiety. As an example, he asks us to consider a man standing on a cliff or tall building. If this man looks over the edge, he experiences two different kinds of fear: the fear of falling, and fear brought on by the impulse to throw himself off the edge. This second type of fear, or anxiety, arises from the realization that he has absolute freedom to choose whether to jump or not, and this fear is as dizzying as his vertigo. Kierkegaard suggests that we experience the same anxiety in all our moral choices, when we realize that we have the freedom to make even the most terrifying decisions. He describes this anxiety as “the dizziness of freedom”, and goes on to explain that although it induces despair, it can also shake us from our unthinking responses by making us more aware of the available choices. In this way it increases our self-awareness and sense of personal responsibility.

The father of existentialism

Kierkegaard’s ideas were largely rejected by his contemporaries, but proved highly influential to later generations. His insistence on the importance and freedom of our choices, and our continual search for meaning and purpose, was to provide the framework for existentialism. This philosophy, developed by Friedrich Nietzsche and Martin Heidegger, was later fully defined by Jean-Paul Sartre. It explores the ways in which we can live meaningfully in a godless universe, where every act is a choice, except the act of our own birth. Unlike these later thinkers, Kierkegaard did not abandon his faith in God, but he was the first to acknowledge the realization of self-consciousness and the “dizziness” or fear of absolute freedom.

Hamlet is caught on the edge of a terrible choice: whether to kill his uncle or leave his father’s death unavenged. Shakespeare’s play demonstrates the anxiety of true freedom of choice.

SØREN KIERKEGAARD

Søren Kierkegaard was born in Copenhagen in 1813, in what became known as the Danish Golden Age of culture. His father, a wealthy tradesman, was both pious and melancholic, and his son inherited these traits, which were to greatly influence his philosophy. Kierkegaard studied theology at the University of Copenhagen, but attended lectures in philosophy. When he came into a sizeable inheritance, he decided to devote his life to philosophy. In 1837 he met and fell in love with Regine Olsen, and three years later they became engaged, but Kierkegaard broke off the engagement the following year, saying that his melancholy made him unsuitable for married life. Though he never lost his faith in God, he continually criticized the Danish national church for hypocrisy. In 1855 he fell unconscious in the street, and died just over a month later.

Key works

1843 Fear and Trembling

1843 Either/Or

1844 The Concept of Anxiety

1847 Works of Love

See also: Immanuel Kant • Georg Hegel • Friedrich Nietzsche • Martin Heidegger • Jean-Paul Sartre • Simone De Beauvoir • Albert Camus
