IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Non-conformism

BEFORE

c.340 BCE Aristotle claims that the city-state is more important than the individual.

1651 Thomas Hobbes says that society without strong government reverts to anarchy.

1762 In The Social Contract, Jean-Jacques Rousseau proposes government by the will of the people.

AFTER

1907 Mahatma Gandhi cites Thoreau as an influence on his campaign of passive resistance in South Africa.

1964 Martin Luther King is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his campaign to end racial discrimination through civil disobedience and noncooperation.

Almost a century after Jean-Jacques Rousseau claimed that nature was essentially benign, American philosopher Henry Thoreau developed the idea further, arguing that “all good things are wild and free”, and that the laws of man suppress rather than protect civil liberties. He saw that political parties were necessarily one-sided, and that their policies often ran contrary to our moral beliefs. For this reason, he believed it was the individual’s duty to protest against unjust laws, and argued that passively allowing such laws to be enacted effectively gave them justification. “Any fool can make a rule, and any fool will mind it,” as he said about English grammar, but the principle runs through his political philosophy too.

In his essay Civil Disobedience, written in 1849, Thoreau proposes a citizen’s right to conscientious objection through non-cooperation and non-violent resistance—which he put into practice by refusing to pay taxes that supported the war in Mexico and perpetuated slavery.

Thoreau’s ideas contrasted sharply with those of his contemporary Karl Marx, and with the revolutionary spirit in Europe at the time, which called for violent action. But they were later adopted by numerous leaders of resistance movements, such as Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King.

Mahatma Gandhi’s campaign of civil disobedience against British rule in India included the Salt March of 1930, undertaken in protest against unjust laws controlling salt production.

See also: Jean-Jacques Rousseau • Adam Smith • Edmund Burke • Karl Marx • Isaiah Berlin • John Rawls
