IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Pragmatism

BEFORE

17th century John Locke challenges rationalism by tracing the origin of our ideas to sense impressions.

18th century Immanuel Kant argues that speculation about what lies beyond our experience is meaningless.

AFTER

1890s William James and John Dewey take up the philosophy of pragmatism.

1920s Logical positivists in Vienna formulate the theory of verification—that the meaning of a statement is the method by which it is verified.

1980s Richard Rorty’s version of pragmatism argues that the very notion of truth can be dispensed with.

Charles Sanders Peirce was the scientist, logician, and philosopher of science who pioneered the philosophical movement known as pragmatism. Deeply sceptical of metaphysical ideas—such as the idea that there is a “real” world beyond the world we experience—he once asked his readers to consider what is wrong with the following theory: a diamond is actually soft, and only becomes hard when it is touched.

Peirce argued that there is “no falsity” in such thinking, for there is no way of disproving it. However, he claimed that the meaning of a concept (such as “diamond” or “hard”) is derived from the object or quality that the concept relates to—and the effects it has on our senses. Whether we think of the diamond as “soft until touched” or “always hard” before our experience, therefore, is irrelevant. Under both theories the diamond feels the same, and can be used in exactly the same way. However, the first theory is far more difficult to work with, and so is of less value to us.

This idea, that the meaning of a concept is the sensory effect of its object, is known as the pragmatic maxim, and it became the founding principle of pragmatism—the belief that the “truth” is the account of reality that works best for us.

One of the key things Peirce was trying to accomplish was to show that many debates in science, philosophy, and theology are meaningless. He claimed that they are often debates about words, rather than reality, because they are debates in which no effect on the senses can be specified.

"Nothing is vital for science; nothing can be."

Charles Sanders Peirce

See also: John Locke • Immanuel Kant • William James • John Dewey • Richard Rorty
