IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Cultural Zionism

BEFORE

5th century BCE Socrates combines both confidence and an admission of his own foolishness.

1511 Desiderius Erasmus writes The Praise of Folly, a satirical work which appears to praise foolish behavior.

1711 The English poet Alexander Pope writes that “Fools rush in where angels fear to tread.”

1843 In his book Fear and Trembling, Søren Kierkegaard writes about founding faith “on the strength of the absurd.”

AFTER

1961 Michel Foucault writes Madness and Civilization, a philosophical study of the history of folly.

Ahad Ha’am was the pen name of the Ukrainian-born Jewish philosopher Asher Ginzberg, a leading Zionist thinker who advocated a Jewish spiritual renaissance. In 1890 he claimed in a semi-satirical essay that although we worship wisdom, self-confidence matters more.

In any difficult or dangerous situation, he says, the wise are those who hold back, weighing up the advantages and disadvantages of any action. Meanwhile (and greatly to the disapproval of the wise) it is the self-confident who forge ahead, and often win the day. Ha’am wants to suggest—and when reading him we should remember that this is a suggestion that is meant half-seriously and half-satirically—that individual folly can often yield a result, simply because of the self-confidence that goes along with it.

Wisdom and confidence

Although in his original essay Ha’am seemed to celebrate the potential advantages of foolishness, this was a view from which he later distanced himself, perhaps afraid that others might read what was essentially an exercise in satire as if it were written with high-minded seriousness. Self-confidence is only warranted, he later made clear, when the difficulties of an undertaking are fully understood and evaluated.

Ha’am was fond of quoting an old Yiddish proverb: “an act of folly which turns out well is still an act of folly.” On some occasions we act foolishly, without fully understanding the difficulties of the task we are undertaking, but we win through because luck is on our side. However, says Ha’am, this does not make our prior foolishness in any way commendable.

If we want our actions to bring results, it may indeed be the case that we need to develop and use the kind of self-confidence that can occasionally be seen in acts of folly. At the same time, we must always temper this self-confidence with wisdom, or our acts will lack true effectiveness in the world.

See also: Socrates • Søren Kierkegaard • Michel Foucault • Luce Irigaray
