IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Vitalism

BEFORE

13th century John Duns Scotus distinguishes between intuitive and abstract thought, and claims that intuitive thought takes precedence.

1781 Immanuel Kant publishes Critique of Pure Reason, claiming that absolute knowledge is impossible.

AFTER

1890s William James begins to explore the philosophy of everyday experience, popularizing pragmatism.

1927 Alfred North Whitehead writes Process philosophy, suggesting that the existence of the natural world should be understood in terms of process and change, not things or fixed stabilities.

Henri Bergson’s 1910 book Creative Evolution explored his vitalism, or theory of life. In it, Bergson wanted to discover whether it is possible to really know something—not just to know about it, but to know it as it actually is.

Ever since the philosopher Immanuel Kant published The Critique of Pure Reason in 1781, many philosophers have claimed that it is impossible for us to know things as they actually are. This is because Kant showed that we can know how things are relative to we ourselves, given the kinds of minds we have; but we can never step outside of ourselves to achieve an absolute view of the world’s actual “things-in-themselves.”

Two forms of knowledge

Bergson, however, does not agree with Kant. He says that there are two different kinds of knowledge: relative knowledge, which involves knowing something from our own unique particular perspective; and absolute knowledge, which is knowing things as they actually are. Bergson believes that these are reached by different methods, the first through analysis or intellect, and the second through intuition. Kant’s mistake, Bergson believes, is that he does not recognize the full importance of our faculty of intuition, which allows us to grasp an object’s uniqueness through direct connection. Our intuition is linked to what Bergson called our élan vital, a life-force (vitalism) that interprets the flux of experience in terms of time rather than space.

Suppose you want to get to know a city, he says. You could compile a record of it by taking photographs of every part, from every possible perspective, before reconstructing these images to give some idea of the city as a whole. But you would be grasping it at one remove, not as a living city. If, on the other hand, you were simply to stroll around the streets, paying attention in the right way, you might acquire knowledge of the city itself—a direct knowledge of the city as it actually is. This direct knowledge, for Bergson, is knowledge of the essence of the city.

But how do we practice intuition? Essentially, it is a matter of seeing the world in terms of our sense of unfolding time. While walking through the city, we have a sense of our own inner time, and we also have an inner sense of the various unfolding times of the city through which we are walking. As these times overlap, Bergson believes that we can make a direct connection with the essence of life itself.

Capturing the essence of a city, person, or object may only be possible through direct knowledge gained from intuition, not analysis. Bergson says we underestimate the value of our intuition.

HENRI BERGSON

Henri Bergson was one of the most influential French philosophers of his time. Born in France in 1859, he was the son of an English mother and a Polish father. His early intellectual interests lay in mathematics, at which he excelled. Despite this, he took up philosophy as a career, initially teaching in schools. When his book Matter and Memory was published in 1896, he was elected to the Collège de France and became a university lecturer. He also had a successful political career, and represented the French government during the establishment of the League of Nations in 1920. His work was widely translated and influenced many other philosophers and psychologists, including William James. He was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1927, and died in 1941 at the age of 81.

Key works

1896 Matter and Memory

1903 An Introduction to Metaphysics

1907 Creative Evolution

1932 The Two Sources of Morality and Religion

See also: John Duns Scotus • Immanuel Kant • William James • Alfred North Whitehead • Gilles Deleuze
