IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of history

APPROACH

Naturalism

BEFORE

55 BCE Lucretius, a Roman poet, explores the origins of societies and civilizations.

1730s The Italian philosopher Giovanni Vico claims that all civilizations pass through three stages: the age of the gods; the age of artistocrats and heroes; and democracy. This is due to “an uninterrupted order of causes and effects.”

1807–22 Georg Hegel writes of history as the continual progress of mind or spirit.

AFTER

2004 In his book, Memory, History, Forgetting, French philosopher Paul Ricoeur explores the necessity not only of remembering, but also of forgetting the past.

In The Life of Reason (1905), the Spanish-American philosopher George Santayana wrote that those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it. Santayana’s naturalistic approach means that he sees knowledge and belief as arising not from reasoning, but through interaction between our minds and the material environment. Santayana is often misquoted as saying that those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it, and this is sometimes understood to mean that we must do our best to remember past atrocities. But Santayana is actually making a point about progress. For progress to be possible, we must not only remember past experiences, but also be able to learn from them; to see different ways of doing things. The psyche structures new beliefs through experiences, and this is how we prevent ourselves from repeating mistakes.

Real progress, Santayana believes, is not so much a matter of revolution as of adaptation, taking what we have learned from the past and using it to build the future. Civilization is cumulative, always building on what has gone before, in the same way that a symphony builds note by note into a whole.

Progress is only possible through an understanding of the past coupled with a sense of possible alternatives. The AT&T Building, New York, uses old architectural patterns in new ways.

See also: Georg Hegel • Karl Marx • William James • Bertrand Russell
