IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ontology

APPROACH

Existentialism

BEFORE

c.500 BCE The Buddha claims that all life is marked by suffering and offers the Eightfold Path as a route to release from its causes.

c.400 CE Saint Augustine asks how there can be suffering in a world created by a good and all-powerful God.

AFTER

1940 The Irish author and scholar C.S. Lewis explores the question of suffering in his book The Problem of Pain.

20th century Unamuno’s philosophy of suffering influences other Spanish writers such as Federico García Lorca and Juan Ramón Jiménez, and the British author Graham Greene.

The Spanish philosopher, novelist, and poet, Miguel de Unamuno, is perhaps best known for his book The Tragic Sense of Life (1913). In this he writes that all consciousness is consciousness of death (we are painfully aware of our lack of immortality) and of suffering. What makes us human is the fact that we suffer.

At first glance, it may seem as if this idea is close to that of Sidhartha Gautama, the Buddha, who also said that suffering is an inescapable part of all human life. But Unamuno’s response to suffering is very different. Unlike the Buddha, Unamuno does not see suffering as a problem to be overcome through practicing detachment. Instead he argues that suffering is an essential part of what it means to exist as a human being, and a vital experience.

If all consciousness amounts to consciousness of human mortality and suffering, as Unamuno claims, and if consciousness is what makes us distinctively human, then the only way we can lend our lives a kind of weight and substance is to embrace this suffering. If we turn away from it, we are not only turning away from what makes us human, we are also turning away from consciousness itself.

Love or happiness

There is also an ethical dimension to Unamuno’s ideas on suffering. He claims that it is essential to acknowledge our pain, because it is only when we face the fact of our own suffering that we become capable of truly loving other suffering beings. This presents us with a stark choice. On the one hand, we can choose happiness and do our best to turn away from suffering. On the other hand, we can choose suffering and love.

The first choice may be easier, but it is a choice that ultimately limits us—indeed, severs us from an essential part of ourselves. The second choice is more difficult, but it is one that opens the way to the possibility of a life of depth and significance.

See also: Siddhartha Gautama • St Augustine of Hippo • Martin Heidegger • Albert Camus • Jean-Paul Sartre
