IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Pragmatism

BEFORE

4th century BCE Aristotle explores the ancient Greek ethical concept of eudaimonia or “human flourishing.”

1845 Publication of Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave boosts support for the abolition of slavery in the United States.

Late 19th and early 20th century Pragmatists, such as Charles Sanders Peirce and William James, argue that we should judge the value of ideas in terms of their usefulness.

AFTER

1950s and 1960s Martin Luther King Jr., as a leader of the African-American Civil Rights movement, adopts a policy of non-violent direct action to address social segregation.

In 1957, close to the end of his long life, the American academic, political radical, and civil rights activist, William Du Bois, wrote what has become known as his last message to the world. Knowing that he did not have much longer to live, he penned a short passage to be read at his funeral. In this message, Du Bois expresses his hope that any good he has done will survive long enough to justify his life, and that those things he has left undone, or has done badly, may be taken up by others to be bettered or completed.

“Always,” Du Bois writes, “human beings will live and progress to a greater, broader, and fuller life.” This is a statement of belief rather than a statement of fact. It is as if Du Bois is saying that we must believe in the possibility of a fuller life, or in the possibility of progress, to be able to progress at all. In this idea, Du Bois shows the influence of the American philosophical movement known as Pragmatism, which claims that what matters is not just our thoughts and beliefs, but also the practical implications of these thoughts and beliefs.

Du Bois goes on to say that the “only possible death” is to lose one’s belief in the prospects for human progress. But there are also hints of deeper philosophical roots here, going all the way back to the ancient Greek idea of eudaimonia or “human flourishing”; for the philosopher Aristotle, this involved living a life of excellence based upon virtue and reason.

"The problem of the 20th century is the problem of the color line."

William Du Bois

Political activist

Du Bois considers two of the major impediments to a life of excellence to be racism and social inequality. He rejects scientific racism—the idea that black people are inferior genetically to white people—that was prevalent throughout most of his life. As racial inequality has no basis in biological science, he regards it as a purely social problem, one that can be addressed only by committed political and social activism.

Du Bois is tireless in his search for solutions to the problem of all forms of social inequality. He argues that social inequality is one of the major causes of crime, claiming that lack of education and employment are correlated with high levels of criminal activity. In his final message to the world, Du Bois reminds us that the task of bringing about a more just society is still incomplete. He states that it is up to future generations to believe in life, so that we can continue to contribute to the fulfilment of “human flourishing.”

Martin Luther King Jr. cited Du Bois’ writings as a key influence in his decision to become actively involved in the battle to demolish racial divisions and establish social equality in the US.

WILLIAM DU BOIS

Du Bois showed exceptional academic promise from an early age. He won a scholarship to Fisk University, and spent two years in Germany studying in Berlin before attending Harvard, where he wrote a dissertation on the slave trade. He was the first African-American to graduate from Harvard with a doctorate.

Alongside an active career as a university teacher and writer, Du Bois was involved in the Civil Rights movement and in radical politics. His political judgement has sometimes been called into question: he famously wrote a glowing eulogy on the death of the Soviet dictator Josef Stalin. Nevertheless, Du Bois remains a key figure in the struggle for racial equality, thanks to what Martin Luther King Jr. called his “divine dissatisfaction with all forms of injustice”.

Key works

1903 The Souls of Black Folk

1915 The Negro

1924 The Gift of Black Folk

1940 Dusk of Dawn: An Essay Toward an Autobiography of a Race Concept

See also: Aristotle • Charles Sanders Peirce • William James • John Dewey
