IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Phenomenology

BEFORE

c.380 BCE Plato writes his Symposium, a philosophical exploration of the nature of love and knowledge.

17th century Blaise Pascal writes of the logic of the human heart.

Early 20th century Edmund Husserl develops his new phenomenological method for studying the experience of the human mind.

AFTER

1953 Polish philosopher Karol Wojtyza (later Pope John Paul II) writes his PhD thesis on Scheler, acknowledging the philosopher’s influence on Roman Catholicism.

The German philosopher Max Scheler belongs to the philosophical movement known as phenomenology. This attempts to investigate all the phenomena of our inner experience; it is the study of our consciousness and its structures.

Scheler says that phenomenology has tended to focus too exclusively on the intellect in examining the structures of consciousness, and has overlooked something fundamental: the experience of love, or of the human heart. He introduces the idea that love forms a bridge from poorer to richer knowledge in an essay entitled Love and Knowledge (1923).

Scheler’s starting point, which is taken from the 17th-century French philosopher Blaise Pascal, is that there is a specific logic to the human heart. This logic is different from the logic of the intellect.

A spiritual midwife

It is love, Scheler believes, that makes things apparent to our experience and that makes knowledge possible. Scheler writes that love is “a kind of spiritual midwife” that is capable of drawing us toward knowledge, both knowledge of ourselves and knowledge of the world. It is the “primary determinant” of a person’s ethics, possibilities, and fate.

At root, in Scheler’s view, to be human is not to be a “thinking thing” as the French philosopher Descartes said in the 17th century, but a being who loves.

"Philosophy is a love-determined movement toward participation in the essential reality of all possibles."

Max Scheler

See also: Plato • Blaise Pascal • Edmund Husserl
