IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Existentialism

BEFORE

1800s Søren Kierkegaard writes of philosophy as a matter of the individual’s struggle with truth.

1880s Friedrich Nietzsche says that “God is dead”, there are no absolute truths, and we must rethink all our values.

1920s Martin Heidegger claims that philosophy is a matter of our relationship with our own existence.

AFTER

From 1940 Hannah Arendt’s ideas of freedom are influenced by Jaspers’ philosophy.

From 1950 Hans-Georg Gadamer explores the idea that philosophy progresses through a fusion of individual perspectives.

For some, philosophy is a way to discover objective truths about the world. For German philosopher and psychiatrist Karl Jaspers, on the other hand, philosophy is a personal struggle. Strongly influenced by the philosophers Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, Jaspers is an existentialist who suggests that philosophy is a matter of our own attempts to realize truth. Since philosophy is an individual struggle, he writes in his 1941 book On my Philosophy, we can philosophize only as individuals. We cannot turn to anybody else to tell us the truth; we must discover it for ourselves, by our own efforts.

The philosopher lives in the invisible realm of the spirit, struggling to realize truth. The thoughts of other, companion, philosophers act as signposts towards potential paths to understanding.

A community of individuals

Although in this sense truth is something that we realize alone, it is in communication with others that we realize the fruits of our efforts and raise our consciousness beyond its limits. Jaspers considers his own philosophy “true” only so far as it aids communication with others. And while other people cannot provide us with a form of “ready-made truth”, philosophy remains a collective endeavor. For Jaspers, each individual’s search

for truth is carried out in community with all those “companions in thought” who have undergone the same personal struggle.

See also: Søren Kierkegaard • Friedrich Nietzsche • Martin Heidegger • Hans-Georg Gadamer • Hannah Arendt
