IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Phenomenology

BEFORE

5th century BCE Socrates claims that he is wise because he knows he is ignorant.

4th century St. Augustine of Hippo writes Confessions, which is both an autobiography and a work of philosophy.

Early 13th century Buddhist monk Shinran claims that salvation is only possible through “other power.”

1920s Martin Heidegger writes that philosophy is a matter of our relationship with our own being.

AFTER

1990s Jacques Derrida, influenced by phenomenology, explores themes such as confession and forgiveness.

Before you read on, confess! This may seem like a strange idea, but it is one that Japanese philosopher Tanabe Hajime wants us to take seriously. If we want to philosophize, Tanabe believes, we cannot do so without making a confession. But what is it that we should confess, and why? To answer these questions, we need to look at the roots of Tanabe’s philosophy in both the European and the Japanese traditions of philosophy. In terms of its European roots, Tanabe traces his thought back to the Greek philosopher Socrates who lived in the 5th century BCE. Socrates is important to Tanabe because of the way he frankly confessed that he knew nothing. According to the story, the oracle at Delphi said that Socrates was the wisest man in Athens, and Socrates, who was certain of his own ignorance, set out to prove the oracle wrong. After innumerable conversations with people in Athens, he came to the conclusion that he was indeed the wisest person in the city, because he alone could accept that he knew nothing.

The Japanese roots of Tanabe’s idea go back to the thought of the Buddhist monk Shinran, who belonged to what is known as the Pure Land school of Buddhism. Shinran’s innovation was his claim that enlightenment is impossible if we rely on our own power. Instead, we must confess our own ignorance and limitations, so that we are open to what both Shinran and Tanabe call tariki, or “other power.” In the context of Pure Land Buddhism, this other power is that of the Buddha Amitabha. In the context of Tanabe’s philosophy, confession leads to a recognition of “absolute nothingness”, and ultimately to self-awakening and wisdom.

The Buddha Amitabha, here shown between Kannon (Compassion) and Seishi (Wisdom), is the principal buddha of the Pure Land school of Buddhism, to which Shinran belonged.

Forsaking ourselves

For Tanabe, then, philosophy is not about discussing the finer points of logic, or about arguing or debating anything—it is not, in fact, an “intellectual” discipline. For Tanabe, it is something much more fundamental—a process of relating, in the deepest possible sense, to our very own being—an idea that is partly shaped by his reading of Martin Heidegger. It is only through confessing, Tanabe believes, that we can rediscover our true being—a process he describes in directly religious terms as a form of death and resurrection. This death and resurrection is the rebirth of the mind through “other power”, and its passing from the limited view of the “self” to the perspective of enlightenment. However, this shift is not simply a preparation for philosophy—on the contrary, it is the very work of philosophy itself, which is rooted in scepticism and the “forsaking of ourselves to the grace of other power.” Philosophy, in other words, is not an activity that we engage in, but something that happens through us when we gain access to our true selves by letting go of the self—a phenomenon that Tanabe calls “action without an acting subject.”

Continual confession is, Tanabe writes, “the ultimate conclusion” to which the recognition of our limitations drives us. In other words, Tanabe asks us not to find new answers to old philosophical questions, but to re-evaluate the very nature of philosophy.

"For a problem to belong to philosophy, there must be something inconceivable in it."

Hajime Tanabe

HAJIME TANABE

Hajime Tanabe was born in Tokyo, Japan, in 1885. After studying at Tokyo University, he was appointed associate professor of philosophy at Kyoto University, where he was an active member of what became known as the Kyoto School of philosophy. In the 1920s, he spent time in Germany studying with the philosophers Edmund Husserl and Martin Heidegger, and after his return to Japan he was appointed to the post of full professor. He was deeply affected by World War II, and when it ended in 1945 he retired from teaching philosophy. Tanabe’s book Philosophy as Metanoetics was published a year later, in 1946. After his retirement, Tanabe dedicated the remainder of his life to meditation and writing.

Key works

1946 Philosophy as Metanoetics

See also: Siddharta Gautama • Socrates • St. Augustine of Hippo • Edmund Husserl • Martin Heidegger • Jacques Derrida
