IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of language

APPROACH

Logic

BEFORE

4th century BCE Aristotle sets the foundations of logic.

Late 19th century Gottlob Frege develops the foundations of modern logic.

Early 20th century Bertrand Russell develops notation that translates natural language into logical propositions.

AFTER

1920s Ideas in the Tractatus are used by philosophers of the Vienna Circle, such as Moritz Schlick and Rudolf Carnap, to develop Logical Positivism.

From 1930 Wittgenstein rejects the ideas expressed in the Tractatus, and begins to explore very different ways of viewing language.

Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus is perhaps one of the most forbidding texts in the history of 20th-century philosophy. Only around 70 pages long in its English translation, the book is made up of a series of highly condensed and technical numbered remarks.

In order to appreciate the full significance of the Tractatus, it is important to set it within its philosophical context. The fact that Wittgenstein is talking about the “limits” of my language and my world sets him firmly within the philosophical tradition that stems from the 18th-century German philosopher Immanuel Kant. In The Critique of Pure Reason, Kant set out to explore the limits of knowledge by posing questions such as “What can I know?” and “What things will lie forever outside of human understanding?” One reason that Kant asked such questions was that he believed many problems in philosophy arose because we fail to recognize the limitations of human understanding. By turning our attention back onto ourselves and asking about the necessary limits of our knowledge, we can then either resolve, or even perhaps dissolve, nearly all of the philosophical problems of the past.

The Tractatus tackles the same kind of task that Kant did, but does so in a far more radical fashion. Wittgenstein states that he is setting out to make clear what can be meaningfully said. In much the same way that Kant strives to set the limits of reason, Wittgenstein wants to set the limits of language and, by implication, of all thought. He does this because he suspects that a great deal of philosophical discussion and disagreement is based on some fundamental errors in how we go about thinking and talking about the world.

"The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem."

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Logical structure

For all of their apparent complexity, Wittgenstein’s central ideas in the Tractatus are essentially based on a fairly simple principle, that both language and the world are formally structured, and that these structures can be broken down into their component parts. Wittgenstein attempts to lay bare the structures both of the world and of language, and then to show the way they relate to each other. Having done this, he attempts to draw a number of wide-reaching philosophical conclusions.

If we are to understand what Wittgenstein means when he says that limits of my language are the limits of my world, we need to ask what he means by the words “world” and “language”, because he does not use these words in the everyday sense we might expect. When he talks about language, the debt Wittgenstein owes to the British philosopher Bertrand Russell becomes apparent. For Russell, who was an important figure in the development of philosophical logic, everyday language was inadequate for talking clearly and precisely about the world. He believed that logic was a “perfect language”, which excluded all traces of ambiguity, so he developed a way of translating everyday language into what he considered a logical form.

Logic is concerned with what are known in philosophy as propositions. We can think of propositions as assertions that it is possible for us to consider as being either true or false. For example, the statement “the elephant is very angry” is a proposition, but the word “elephant” is not. According to Wittgenstein’s Tractatus, meaningful language must consist solely of propositions. “The totality of propositions,” he writes, “is language.”

Knowing a little about what Wittgenstein means by language, we can now explore what he means by “the world.” The Tractatus begins with the claim that “the world is all that is the case.” This might appear to be straightforward and robustly matter-of-fact, but taken on its own, it is not entirely clear what Wittgenstein means by this statement. He goes on to write that “the world is the totality of facts, not of things.” Here we can see a parallel between the way that Wittgenstein treats language and the way he is treating the world. It may be a fact, for example, that the elephant is angry, or that there is an elephant in the room, but an elephant just by itself is not a fact.

From this point, it begins to become clear how the structure of language and that of the world might be related. Wittgenstein says that language “pictures” the world. He formulated this idea during World War I, when he read in a newspaper about a court case in Paris. The case concerned a car accident, and the events were re-enacted for those present in court using model cars and model pedestrians to represent the cars and pedestrians in the real world. The model cars and the model pedestrians were able to depict their counterparts, because they were related to each other in exactly the same way as the real cars and real pedestrians involved in the accident. Similarly, all the elements depicted on a map are related to each other in exactly the same way as they are in the landscape that the map represents. What a picture shares with that which it is depicting, Wittgenstein says, is a logical form.

It is important here to realize that we are talking about logical pictures, and not about visual pictures. Wittgenstein presents a useful example to show what he means. The sound waves generated by a performance of a symphony, the score of that symphony, and the pattern formed by the grooves on a gramophone recording of the symphony all share between them the same logical form. Wittgenstein states, “A picture is laid against reality like a measure.” In this way it can depict the world.

Of course, our picture may be incorrect. It may not agree with reality, for example, by appearing to show that the elephant is not angry when the elephant is, in fact, very angry. There is no middle ground here for Wittgenstein. Because he starts with propositions that are, by their very nature, true or false, pictures also are either true or false.

Language and the world, then, both have a logical form; and language can speak about the world by picturing the world, and picturing it in a fashion that agrees with reality. It is at this point that Wittgenstein’s idea gets really interesting, and it is here that we can see why Wittgenstein is interested in the limits of language.

Consider the following idea: “You should give half of your salary to charity.” This is not picturing anything in the world in the sense meant by Wittgenstein. What can be said—what Wittgenstein calls the “totality of true propositions”—is merely the sum of all those things that are the case, or the natural sciences.

Discussion about religious and ethical values is, for Wittgenstein, strictly meaningless. Because the things that we are attempting to talk about when we discuss such topics are beyond the limits of the world, they also lie beyond the limits of our language. Wittgenstein writes, “It is clear that ethics cannot be put into language.”

The ancient Egyptians arranged symbols and stylized images of objects in the world, known as hieroglyphs, into logically structured sequences to create a form of written language.

A digital image, although not the same sort of object as the one it depicts, has the same “logical form.” Words only represent reality for Wittgenstein if, again, both have the same logical form.

"Logic is not a body of doctrine but a mirror-image of the world."

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Beyond words

Some readers of Wittgenstein, at this point, claim that he is a champion of the sciences, driving out vague concepts involved in talk of ethics, religion, and the like. But something more complex is going on. Wittgenstein does not think that the “problems of life” are nonsensical. Instead, he believes that these are the most important problems of all. It is simply that they cannot be put into words, and because of this, they cannot become a part of philosophy. Wittgenstein writes that these things, even though we cannot speak of them, nevertheless make themselves manifest, adding that “they are what is mystical.”

All of this, however, has serious repercussions for the propositions that lie within the Tractatus itself. After all, these are not propositions that picture the world. Even logic, one of Wittgenstein’s major tools, does not say anything about the world. Is the Tractatus, therefore, nonsense? Wittgenstein himself was fearless in following his argument to its conclusion, ultimately recognizing that the answer to such a question must be yes. Anybody who understands the Tractatus properly, he claims, will eventually see that the propositions used in it are nonsense, too. They are like the steps of a philosophical ladder that helps us to climb altogether beyond the problems of philosophy, but which we can kick away once we have ascended.

"What we cannot speak about we must pass over in silence."

Ludwig Wittgenstein

Philosophy demands logical, unambiguous language. Wittgenstein concludes, therefore, that it can only be made up of propositions, or statements of fact, such as “the cat sat on the mat”, which can be clearly divided into their component parts.

Change of direction

After completing the Tractatus, Wittgenstein concluded that there were no more philosophical problems left to resolve, and so abandoned the discipline. However, over the course of the 1920s and 1930s, he began to question his earlier thinking, becoming one of its fiercest critics. In particular, he questioned his once firmly held belief that language consists solely of propositions, a view that ignores much of what we do in our everyday speech—from telling jokes, to cajoling, to scolding.

Nevertheless, despite all of its problems, the Tractatus remains one of the most challenging and compelling works of Western philosophy—and ultimately one of the most mysterious.

LUDWIG WITTGENSTEIN

Born into a wealthy Viennese family in 1889, Wittgenstein first studied engineering and in 1908 traveled to England to continue his education in Manchester. However, he soon developed an interest in logic, and by 1911 had moved to Cambridge to study under the philosopher Bertrand Russell.

During World War I, he served on the Russian front and in Italy, where he was taken prisoner. Around this time, he began the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, which was published in 1921.

Believing that the Tractatus resolved all the problems of philosophy, Wittgenstein now embarked on an itinerant career as a schoolteacher, gardener, and architect. But after developing criticisms of his earlier ideas, he resumed his work at Cambridge in 1929, becoming a professor there in 1939. He died in 1951.

Key works

1921 Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus

1953 Philosophical Investigations

1958 The Blue and Brown Books

1977 Remarks on Colour

See also: Aristotle • Immanuel Kant • Gottlob Frege • Bertrand Russell • Rudolf Carnap
