IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ontology

APPROACH

Phenomenology

BEFORE

c.350 BCE Diogenes of Sinope uses a plucked chicken to parody Plato’s followers’ claim that a human being is a “featherless biped.”

1900–13 Edmund Husserl proposes his phenomenological theories and method in Logical Investigations and Ideas I.

AFTER

1940s Jean-Paul Sartre publishes Being and Nothingness, which looks at the connection between “being” and human freedom.

1960 Hans-Georg Gadamer’s Truth and Method, inspired by Heidegger, explores the nature of human understanding.

It is said that in ancient Athens the followers of Plato gathered one day to ask themselves the following question: “What is a human being?” After a great deal of thought, they came up with the following answer: “a human being is a featherless biped.” Everybody seemed content with this definition until Diogenes the Cynic burst into the lecture hall with a live plucked chicken, shouting, “Behold! I present you with a human being.” After the commotion had died down, the philosophers reconvened and refined their definition. A human being, they said, is a featherless biped with broad nails.

This curious story from the history of early philosophy shows the kinds of difficulties philosophers have sometimes been faced with when attempting to give abstract, general definitions of what it is to be human. Even without the intervention of Diogenes, it seems clear that describing ourselves as featherless bipeds does not really capture much of what it means to be human.

An insider’s perspective

It is this question—how we might go about analyzing what it is to be human—that concerned the philosopher Martin Heidegger. When Heidegger came to answer the question, he did so in a way that was strikingly different from many of his predecessors. Instead of attempting an abstract definition that looks at human life from the outside, he attempts to provide a much more concrete analysis of “being” from what could be called an insider’s position. He says that since we exist in the thick of things—in the midst of life—if we want to understand what it is to be human, we have to do so by looking at human life from within this life.

Heidegger was a student of Husserl, and he followed Husserl’s method of phenomenology. This is a philosophical approach that looks at phenomena—how things appear—through examining our experience of them. For example, phenomenology would not look directly at the question “what is a human being?” but would instead look at the question “what is it like to be human?”

"The question of existence never gets straightened out except through existing itself."

Martin Heidegger

The human existence

For Heidegger, this constitutes the fundamental question of philosophy. He was most interested in the philosophical subject of ontology (from the Greek word ontos, meaning “being”), which looks at questions about being or existence. Examples of ontological questions might be: “what does it mean to say that something exists?” and “what are the different kinds of things that exist?” Heidegger wanted use the question “what is it like to be human?” as a way of answering deeper questions about existence in general.

In his book, Being and Time, Heidegger claims that when other philosophers have asked ontological questions, they have tended to use approaches that are too abstract and shallow. If we want to know what it means to say that something exists, we need to start looking at the question from the perspective of those beings for whom being is an issue. We can assume that although cats, dogs, and toadstools are beings, they do not wonder about their being: they do not fret over ontological questions; they do not ask “what does it mean to say that something exists?” But there is, Heidegger points out, one being that does wonder about these things, and that is the human being. In saying that we are ourselves the entities to be analyzed, Heidegger is saying that we if we want to explore questions of being, we have to start with ourselves, by looking at what it means for us to exist.

We try to make sense of the world by engaging with projects and tasks that lend life a unity. Being human, Heidegger says, means to be immersed in the day-to-day world.

Being and time

When Heidegger asks about the meaning of being, he is not asking about abstract ideas, but about something very direct and immediate. In the opening pages of his book, he says that the meaning of our being must be tied up with time; we are essentially temporal beings. When we are born, we find ourselves in the world as if we had been thrown here on a trajectory we have not chosen. We simply find that we have come to exist, in an ongoing world that pre-existed us, so that at our birth we are presented with a particular historical, material, and spiritual environment. We attempt to make sense of this world by engaging in various pastimes—for example, we might learn Latin, or attempt to find true love, or decide to build ourselves a house. Through these time-consuming projects we literally project ourselves toward different possible futures; we define our existence. However, sometimes we become aware that there is an outermost limit to all our projects, a point at which everything we plan will come to an end, whether finished or unfinished. This point is the point of our death. Death, Heidegger says, is the outermost horizon of our being: everything we can do or see or think takes place within this horizon. We cannot see beyond it.

Heidegger’s technical vocabulary is famously difficult to understand, but this is largely because he is attempting to explore complex philosophical questions in a concrete or non-abstract way; he wants to relate to our actual experience. To say that “the furthest horizon of our being is death” is to say something about what it is like to live a human life, and it captures some idea of what we are in a way that many philosophical definitions—“featherless biped” or “political animal”, for example—overlook.

"We should raise anew the question of the meaning of being."

Martin Heidegger

Living authentically

It is to Heidegger that we owe the philosophical distinction between authentic and inauthentic existence. Most of the time we are wrapped up in various ongoing projects, and forget about death. But in seeing our life purely in terms of the projects in which we are engaged, we miss a more fundamental dimension of our existence, and to that extent, Heidegger says, we are existing inauthentically. When we become aware of death as the ultimate limit of our possibilities, we start to reach a deeper understanding of what it means to exist.

For example, when a good friend dies, we may look at our own lives and realize that the various projects which absorb us from day to day feel meaningless, and that there is a deeper dimension to life that is missing. And so we may find ourselves changing our priorities and projecting ourselves toward different futures.

All being is a “being-towards-death”, but only humans recognize this. Our lives are temporal, and it is only once we realize this that we can live a meaningful and authentic life.

"Dying is not an event; it is a phenomenon to be understood existentially."

Martin Heidegger

A deeper language

Heidegger’s later philosophy continues to tackle questions of being, but it turns away from his earlier, exacting approach to take a more poetic look at the same kinds of questions. Philosophy, he comes to suspect, simply cannot reflect this deeply on our own being. In order to ask questions about human existence, we must use the richer, deeper language of poetry, which engages us in a way that goes far beyond the mere exchange of information.

Heidegger was one of the 20th century’s most influential philosophers. His early attempt to analyze what it means to be human, and how one might live an authentic life, inspired philosophers such as Sartre, Levinas, and Gadamer, and contributed to the birth of existentialism. His later, more poetic, thinking has also had a powerful influence on ecological philosophers, who believe it offers a way of thinking about what it means to be a human being within a world under threat of environmental destruction.

MARTIN HEIDEGGER

Heidegger is acknowledged to be one of the most important philosophers of the 20th century. He was born in 1889 in Messkirch, Germany, and had early aspirations to be a priest, but after coming across the writings of Husserl he took up philosophy instead. He quickly became well known as an inspirational lecturer, and was nicknamed “the magician of Messkirch.” In the 1930s he became rector of Freiburg University and a member of the Nazi party. The extent and nature of his involvement with Nazism remains controversial, as is the question of how far his philosophy is implicated in the ideologies of Nazism.

Heidegger spent the last 30 years of his life traveling and writing, exchanging ideas with friends such as Hannah Arendt and the physicist Werner Heisenberg. He died in Freiburg in 1976, aged 86.

Key works

1927 Being and Time

1936–46 Overcoming Metaphyics

1955–56 The Principle of Reason

1955–57 Identity and Difference

See also: Plato • Diogenes of Sinope • Edmund Husserl • Hans-Georg Gadamer • Ernst Cassirer • Jean-Paul Sartre • Hannah Arendt • Richard Rorty
