IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Existentialism

BEFORE

13th century Japanese philosopher D¯ogen writes about “forgetting the self.”

Late 19th century Friedrich Nietzsche writes about the influence of “climate” on philosophy; this idea becomes important to Watsuji’s thought.

1927 Martin Heidegger publishes Being and Time. Watsuji goes on to rethink Heidegger’s book in the light of his ideas on “climate.”

AFTER

Late 20th century Japanese philosopher Yuasa Yasuo further develops Watsuji’s ethics of community.

Tetsuro Watsuji was one of the leading philosophers in Japan in the early part of the 20th century, and he wrote on both Eastern and Western philosophy. He studied in Japan and Europe, and like many Japanese philosophers of his time, his work shows a creative synthesis of these two very different traditions.

Forgetting the self

Watsuji’s studies of Western approaches to ethics convinced him that thinkers in the West tend to take an individualistic approach to human nature, and so also to ethics. But for Watsuji, individuals can only be understood as expressions of their particular times, relationships, and social contexts, which together constitute a “climate.” He explores the idea of human nature in terms of our relationships with the wider community, which form a network within which we exist; Watsuji calls this “betweenness.” For Watsuji ethics is a matter not of individual action, but of the forgetting or sacrifice of one’s self, so that the individual can work for the benefit of the wider community.

Watsuji’s nationalist ethics and insistence on the superiority of the Japanese race led to his fall from favor following World War II, although he later distanced himself from these views.

Samurai warriors often sacrificed their own lives in battle in order to save the state, in an act of extreme loyalty and self-negation that Watsuji called kenshin, or “absolute self-sacrifice.”

See also: Søren Kierkegaard • Friedrich Nietzsche • Nishida Kitaro • Hajime Tanabe • Martin Heidegger
