IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Frankfurt School

BEFORE

c.380 BCE Plato writes his Symposium, considered the first sustained philosophical account of love.

1863 The French writer Charles Baudelaire explores the idea of the flâneur, the “person who walks the city to experience it.”

AFTER

1955 Guy Debord establishes psychogeography, the study of the effects of geography on an individual’s emotions and behavior.

1972 Italian novelist Italo Calvino explores the relationships between cities and signs in his book Invisible Cities.

The German philosopher Walter Benjamin was an affiliate of the Frankfurt School, a group of neo-Marxist social theorists who explored the significance of mass culture and communication. Benjamin was also fascinated by the techniques of film and literature, and his 1926 essay One-Way Street is an experiment in literary construction. It is a collection of observations—intellectual and empirical—that apparently occur to him as he walks down an imaginary city street.

In the essay Benjamin does not set out a grand theory. Instead he wants to surprise us with ideas, in the same way that we might be surprised by something catching our eye while on a walk. Toward the end of the essay, he says that “Quotations in my work are like wayside robbers who leap out, brandishing weapons, and relieve the idler of his certainty.”

"The construction of life currently lies far more in the hands of facts than of convictions."

Walter Benjamin

Illuminating love

The idea that the only way of knowing a person is to love them hopelessly appears in the middle of the essay, under the heading “Arc Lamp.” In a flare of light, Benjamin pauses and thinks just this, and no more—the essay moves immediately afterward to a new section. We are forced to guess what he means. Is he saying that knowledge arises out of love? Or that it is only when we stop hoping for some outcome that we can clearly see the beloved? We cannot know. All we can do is walk down the street alongside Benjamin, experiencing the flare of light of these passing thoughts.

See also: Plato • Karl Marx • Theodor Adorno • Roland Barthes
