IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Frankfurt School

BEFORE

1821 Georg Hegel writes in his Philosophy of Right that what is actual is rational and what is rational is actual.

1867 Karl Marx publishes the first volume of Das Kapital, setting out his view of the “laws of motion” within capitalist societies, and asserting that capitalism is guilty of exploiting humans.

1940s Martin Heidegger begins to explore the problems of technology.

AFTER

2000 Slavoj Žižek explores the relationship between technology, capitalist society, and totalitarianism.

At first glance, nothing seems to be more irrational than Marcuse’s claim that “that which is” cannot be true, which appears in his 1941 book, Reason and Revolution. If that which is cannot be true, the reader is tempted to ask, then what is? But Marcuse’s idea is partly an attempt to overturn the claim made by the German philosopher Hegel that what is rational is actual, and also that what is actual is rational.

Marcuse believes this is a dangerous idea because it leads us to think that what is actually the case—such as our existing political system—is necessarily rational. He reminds us that those things we take as reasonable may be far more unreasonable than we like to admit. He also wants to shake us up into realizing the irrational nature of many of the things that we -take for granted.

Subversive reason

In particular, Marcuse is deeply uneasy with capitalist societies and with what he calls their “terrifying harmony of freedom and oppression, productivity and destruction, growth and regression.” We assume that the societies we live in are based upon reason and justice, but when we look more closely, we may find that they are neither as just nor as reasonable as we believe.

Marcuse is not discounting reason, but trying to point out that reason is subversive, and that we can use it to call into question the society in which we live. The aim of philosophy, for Marcuse, is a “rationalist theory of society.”

Fast cars are the kind of consumables that Marcuse accuses us of using to recognize ourselves; he says we find “our soul” in these items, becoming mere extensions of the things we create.

See also: Georg Hegel • Karl Marx • Martin Heidegger • Slavoj Žižek
