IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of history

APPROACH

Hermeneutics

BEFORE

Early 19th century German philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher lays the groundwork for hermeneutics.

1890s Wilhelm Dilthey, a German philosopher, describes interpretation as taking place in the “hermeneutic circle.”

1927 Martin Heidegger explores the interpretation of being, in Being and Time.

AFTER

1979 Richard Rorty uses a hermeneutic approach in his book Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature.

1983–85 French philosopher Paul Ricoeur writes Time and Narrative, examining the capacity of narrative to represent our feeling of time.

Gadamer is associated in particular with one form of philosophy: “hermeneutics.” Derived from the Greek word hermeneuo, meaning “interpret”, this is the study of how humans interpret the world.

Gadamer studied philosophy under Martin Heidegger, who said that the task of philosophy is to interpret our existence. This interpretation is always a process of deepening our understanding by starting from what we already know. The process is similar to how we might interpret a poem. We start by reading it carefully in the light of our present understanding. If we come to a line that seems strange or particularly striking, we might need to reach for a deeper level of understanding. As we interpret individual lines, our sense of the poem as a whole might begin to change; and as our sense of the poem as a whole changes, so might our understanding of individual lines. This is known as the “hermeneutic circle.”

Heidegger’s approach to philosophy moved in this circular fashion, and this was the approach that Gadamer later explored in his book Truth and Method. Gadamer goes on to point out that our understanding is always from the point of view of a particular point in history. Our prejudices and beliefs, the kinds of questions that we think are worth asking, and the kinds of answers with which we are satisfied are all the product of our history. We cannot stand outside of history and culture, so we can never reach an absolutely objective perspective.

But these prejudices should not be seen as a bad thing. They are, after all, our starting point, and our current understanding and sense of meaning are based upon these prejudices and biases. Even if it were possible to get rid of all our prejudices, we would not find that we would then see things clearly. Without any given framework for interpretation, we would not be able to see anything at all.

When viewing historical objects we should not view time as a gulf to be bridged, says Gadamer. Its distance is filled with the continuity of tradition, which sheds light on our understanding.

Conversing with history

Gadamer sees the process of understanding our lives and our selves as similar to having a “conversation with history.” As we read historical texts that have existed for centuries, the differences in their traditions and assumptions reveal our own cultural norms and prejudices, leading us to broaden and deepen our understanding of our own lives in the present. For instance, if I pick up a book by Plato, and read it carefully, I might find not only that I am deepening my understanding of Plato, but also that my own prejudices and biases become clear, and perhaps begin to shift. Not only am I reading Plato, but Plato is reading me. Through this dialogue, or what Gadamer calls “the fusion of horizons”, my understanding of the world reaches a deeper, richer level.

"Because an experience is itself within the whole of life, the whole of life is present in it too."

Hans-Georg Gadamer

HANS-GEORG GADAMER

Gadamer was born in Marburg in 1900, but grew up in Breslau, Germany (now Wroclaw, Poland). He studied philosophy first in Breslau and then in Marburg, where he wrote a second doctoral dissertation under the tutelage of the philosopher Martin Heidegger, who was an enormous influence on his work. He became an associate professor at Marburg, beginning a long academic career which eventually included succeeding the philosopher Karl Jaspers as Professor of Philosophy in Heidelberg in 1949. His most important book, Truth and Method, was published when he was 60. It attacked the idea that science offered the only route to truth and its publication brought him wider international fame. A sociable and lively man, Gadamer remained active right up until his death in Heidelberg at the age of 102.

Key works

1960 Truth and Method

1976 Philosophical Hermeneutics

1980 Dialogue and Dialectic

1981 Reason in the Age of Science

See also: Immanuel Kant • Georg Hegel • Martin Heidegger • Jürgen Habermas • Jacques Derrida • Richard Rorty
