IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Frankfurt School

BEFORE

1st century CE Saint Paul writes about being a “fool for Christ.”

500–1450 The idea of the “holy fool”, who represents an alternative view of the world, becomes popular throughout Medieval Europe.

20th century The global rise of differing forms of mass-media communication raises new ethical questions.

AFTER

1994 Portuguese neuroscientist Antonio Damasio publishes Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain.

21st century Slavoj Žižek explores the political, social, and ethical dimensions of popular culture.

The idea of the holy fool has a long tradition in the West, dating all the way back to Saint Paul’s letter to the Corinthians in which he asks his followers to be “fools for Christ’s sake.” Throughout the Middle Ages this idea was developed into the popular cultural figure of the saint or sage who was foolish or lacked intelligence, but who was morally good or pure.

In his book Minima Moralia, the German philosopher Theodor Adorno calls into question this long tradition. He is suspicious of attempts to (as he puts it) “absolve and beatify the blockhead”, and wants to make the case that goodness involves our entire being, both our feeling and our understanding.

The problem with the idea of the holy fool, Adorno says, is that it divides us into different parts, and in doing so makes us incapable of acting judiciously at all. In reality, judgement is measured by the extent to which we manage to make feeling and understanding cohere. Adorno’s view implies that evil acts are not just failures of feeling, but also failures of intelligence and understanding.

Adorno was a member of the Frankfurt School, a group of philosophers who were interested in the development of capitalism. He condemned forms of mass communication such as television and radio, claiming that these have led to the erosion of both intelligence and feeling, and to a decline in the ability to make moral choices and judgements. If we choose to switch off our brains by watching blockbuster movies (insofar as we can choose at all, given the prevailing cultural conditions in which we live), for Adorno, this is a moral choice. Popular culture, he believes, not only makes us stupid; it also makes us unable to act morally.

Essential emotions

Adorno believes that the opposite error to that of imagining that there might be such a thing as a holy fool is imagining that we can judge on intelligence alone, without emotion. This might happen in a court of law; judges have been known to instruct the jury to put all emotion to one side, so that they can come to a cool and measured decision. But in Adorno’s view, we can no more make wise judgements by abandoning emotion than we can by abandoning intelligence.

When the last trace of emotion has been driven out of our thinking, Adorno writes, we are left with nothing to think about, and the idea that intelligence might benefit “from the decay of the emotions” is simply mistaken. For this reason Adorno believes that the sciences, which are a form of knowledge that do not make reference to our emotions, have, like popular culture, had a dehumanizing effect upon us.

Unexpectedly, it may in fact be the sciences that will ultimately demonstrate the wisdom of Adorno’s central concerns about the severing of intelligence and feeling. Since the 1990s, scientists such as Antonio Damasio have studied emotions and the brain, providing increasing evidence of the many mechanisms by which emotions guide decision-making. So if we are to judge wisely or even to judge at all, we must employ both emotion and intelligence.

"The power of judgement is measured by the cohesion of self."

Theodor Adorno

Lighthearted television is inherently dangerous, says Adorno, because it distorts the world and imbues us with stereotypes and biases that we begin to take on as our own.

THEODOR ADORNO

Born in 1903 in Frankfurt, Theodor Adorno’s two passions from an early age were philosophy and music; his mother and aunt were both accomplished musicians. At university Adorno studied musicology and philosophy, graduating in 1924. He had ambitions to be a composer, but setbacks in his musical career led him increasingly toward philosophy. One area in which Adorno’s interests converged was in his criticism of the industry surrounding popular culture, demonstrated in his notorious essay On Jazz, published in 1936.

In 1938, during the rise of Nazism in Germany, Adorno emigrated to New York, and then moved to Los Angeles, where he taught at the University of California. He returned to Germany after the end of World War II, and took up a professorship at Frankfurt. Adorno died at the age of 66 while on holiday in Switzerland in 1969.

Key works

1949 Philosophy of New Music

1951 Minima Moralia

1966 Negative Dialectics

1970 Aesthetic Theory

See also: René Descartes • Georg Hegel • Karl Marx • Slavoj Žižek
