IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Phenomenology

BEFORE

1920s Edmund Husserl explores our relationship to other human beings from a phenomenological perspective.

1920s Austrian philosopher Martin Buber claims that meaning arises out of our relationship with others.

AFTER

From 1960 Levinas’ s work on relationships influences the thoughts of French feminist philosophers such as Luce Irigaray and Julia Kristeva.

From 1970 Levinas’s ideas on responsibility influence psychotherapy.

2001 Jacques Derrida explores responsibility in relation to humanitarian questions such as political asylum.

Levinas’ s ideas are most easily understood through looking at an example. Imagine that you are walking down a street on a cold winter evening, and you see a beggar huddled in a doorway. She may not even be asking for change, but somehow you can’ t help feeling some obligation to respond to this stranger’ s need. You may choose to ignore her, but even if you do, something has already been communicated to you: the fact that this is a person who needs your help.

Inevitable communication

Levinas was a Lithuanian Jew who lived through the Holocaust. He says that reason lives in language in Totality and Infinity (1961), explaining that “language” is the way that we communicate with others even before we have started to speak. Whenever I see the face of another person, the fact that this is another human being and that I have a responsibility for them is instantly communicated. I can turn away from this responsibility, but I cannot escape it. This is why reason arises out of the face-to-face relationships we have with other people. It is because we are faced by the needs of other human beings that we must offer justifications for our actions. Even if you do not give your change to the beggar, you find yourself having to justify your choice.

Nothing else in our lives so disrupts our consciousness as an encounter with another person, who, simply by being there, calls to us and asks us to account for ourselves.

See also: Edmund Husserl • Roland Barthes • Luce Irigaray • Hélène Cixous • Julia Kristeva
