IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Phenomenology

BEFORE

4th century BCE Aristotle claims that philosophy begins with a sense of wonder.

1641 René Descartes’ Meditations on First Philosophy establishes a form of mind–body dualism that Merleau-Ponty will reject.

Early 1900s Edmund Husserl founds phenomenology as a philosophical school.

1927 Martin Heidegger writes Being and Time, a major influence on Merleau-Ponty.

AFTER

1979 Hubert Dreyfus draws on the works of Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and Merleau-Ponty to explore philosophical problems raised by artificial intelligence and robotics.

The idea that philosophy begins with our ability to wonder at the world goes back as far as ancient Greece. Usually we take our everyday lives for granted, but Aristotle claimed that if we want to understand the world more deeply, we have to put aside our familiar acceptance of things. And nowhere, perhaps, is this harder to do than in the realm of our experience. After all, what could be more reliable than the facts of direct perception?

French philosopher Merleau-Ponty was interested in looking more closely at our experience of the world, and in questioning our everyday assumptions. This puts him in the tradition known as phenomenology, an approach to philosophy pioneered by Edmund Husserl at the beginning of the 20th century. Husserl wanted to explore first-person experience in a systematic way, while putting all assumptions about it to one side.

"Man is in the world and only in the world does he know himself."

Maurice Merleau-Ponty

The body-subject

Merleau-Ponty takes up Husserl’s approach, but with one important difference. He is concerned that Husserl ignores what is most important about our experience—the fact that it consists not just of mental experience, but also of bodily experience. In his most important book, The Phenomenology of Perception, Merleau-Ponty explores this idea and comes to the conclusion that the mind and body are not separate entities—a thought that contradicts a long philosophical tradition championed by Descartes. For Merleau-Ponty, we have to see that thought and perception are embodied, and that the world, consciousness, and the body are all part of a single system. And his alternative to the disembodied mind proposed by Descartes is what he calls the body-subject. In other words, Merleau-Ponty rejects the dualist’s view that the world is made of two separate entities, called mind and matter.

Cognitive science

Because he was interested in seeing the world anew, Merleau-Ponty took an interest in cases of abnormal experience. For example, he believed that the phantom limb phenomenon (in which an amuptee “feels” his missing limb) shows that the body cannot simply be a machine. If it were, the body would no longer acknowledge the missing part—but it still exists for the subject because the limb has always been bound up with the subject’s will. In other words, the body is never “just” a body—it is always a “lived” body.

Merleau-Ponty’s focus on the role of the body in experience, and his insights into the nature of the mind as fundamentally embodied, have led to a revival of interest in his work among cognitive scientists. Many recent developments in cognitive science seem to bear out his idea that, once we break with our familiar acceptance of the world, experience is very strange indeed.

MRI scans of the brain provide doctors with life-saving information. However, in Merleau-Ponty’s view, no amount of physical information can give us a complete account of experience.

MAURICE MERLEAU-PONTY

Maurice Merleau-Ponty was born in Rochefort-sur-Mer, France, in 1908. He attended the École Normale Supérieure along with Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir, and graduated in philosophy in 1930. He worked as a teacher at various schools, until joining the infantry during World War II. His major work, The Phenomenology of Perception, was published in 1945, after which he taught philosophy at the University of Lyon.

Merleau-Ponty’s interests extended beyond philosophy to include subjects such as education and child psychology. He was also a regular contributor to the journal Les Temps modernes. In 1952, Merleau-Ponty became the youngest-ever Chair of Philosophy at the College de France, and remained in the post until his death in 1961, at the age of only 53.

Key works

1942 The Structure of Behaviour

1945 The Phenomenology of Perception

1964 The Visible and the Invisible

See also: Aristotle • Edmund Husserl • Ludwig Wittgenstein • Martin Heidegger • Jean-Paul Sartre
