IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Feminism

BEFORE

c.350 BCE Aristotle says, “The female is a female by virtue of a certain lack of qualities.”

1792 Mary Wollstonecraft publishes A Vindication of the Rights of Woman, illustrating the equality of the sexes.

1920s Martin Heidegger sets out a “philosophy of existence,” prefiguring existentialism.

1940s Jean-Paul Sartre says “existence precedes essence.”

AFTER

1970s Luce Irigaray explores the philosophical implications of sexual difference.

From 1980 Julia Kristeva breaks down the notions of “male” and “female” as characterized by de Beauvoir.

French philosopher Simone de Beauvoir writes in her book The Second Sex that throughout history, the standard measure of what we take to be human—both in philosophy and in society at large—has been a peculiarly male view. Some philosophers, such as Aristotle, have been explicit in equating full humanity with maleness. Others have not said as much, but have nevertheless taken maleness as the standard against which humanity is to be judged. It is for this reason that de Beauvoir says that the Self (or “I”) of philosophical knowledge is by default male, and his binary pair—the female—is therefore something else, which she calls the Other. The Self is active and knowing, whereas the Other is all that the Self rejects: passivity, voicelessness, and powerlessness.

De Beauvoir is also concerned with the way that women are judged to be equal only insofar as they are like men. Even those who have written on behalf of the equality of women, she says, have done so by arguing that equality means that women can be and do the same as men. She claims that this idea is mistaken, because it ignores the fact that women and men are different. De Beauvoir’s philosophical background was in phenomenology, the study of how things appear to our experience. This view maintains that each of us constructs the world from within the frame of our own consciousness; we constitute things and meanings from the stream of our experiences. Consequently de Beauvoir maintains that the relationship that we have to our own bodies, to others, and to the world, as well as to philosophy itself, is strongly influenced by whether we are male or female.

"Representation of the world is the work of men; they describe it from their own point of view."

Simone de Beauvoir

Existential feminism

Simone De Beauvoir was also an existentialist, believing that we are born without purpose and must carve out an authentic existence for ourselves, choosing what to become. In applying this idea to the notion of “woman”, she asks us to separate the biological entity (the bodily form which females are born into) from femininity, which is a social construct. Since any construct is open to change and interpretion, this means that there are many ways of “being a woman”; there is room for existential choice. In the introduction to The Second Sex de Beauvoir notes society’s awareness of this fluidity: “We are exhorted to be women, remain women, become women. It would appear, then, that every female human being is not necessarily a woman.” She later states the position explicitly: “One is not born but becomes a woman.”

De Beauvoir says that women must free themselves both from the idea that they must be like men, and from the passivity that society has induced in them. Living a truly authentic existence carries more risk than accepting a role handed down by society, but it is the only path to equality and freedom.

The many myths of woman as mother, wife, virgin, symbol of nature, and so on trap women, claimed de Beauvoir, into impossible ideals, while denying their individual selves and situations.

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR

The existentialist philosopher Simone de Beauvoir was born in Paris in 1908. She studied philosophy at the Sorbonne University, and it was here that she met Jean-Paul Sartre, with whom she began a lifelong relationship. Both a philosopher and an award-winning novelist, she often explored philosophical themes within fictional works such as She Came to Stay and The Mandarins. Her most famous work, The Second Sex, brought an existentialist approach to feminist ideas. Despite initially being vilified by the political right and left, and being placed on the Vatican’s Index of Forbidden Books, it became one of the most important feminist works of the 20th century. De Beauvoir was a prolific writer, producing travel books, memoirs, a four-volume autobiography, and political essays over the course of her life. She died at the age of 78, and was buried in Montparnasse cemetery.

Key works

1944 Pyrrhus and Cineas

1947 The Ethics of Ambiguity

1949 The Second Sex

1954 The Mandarins

See also: Hypatia of Alexandria • Mary Wollstonecraft • Jean-Paul Sartre • Luce Irigaray • Hélène Cixous • Martha Nussbaum
