IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of language

APPROACH

Analytic philosophy

BEFORE

c.400 BCE Plato’s Cratylus investigates the relationship between words and things.

19th century Søren Kierkegaard stresses the importance of the study of language for philosophy.

1950s Ludwig Wittgenstein writes that there is no such thing as a private language.

AFTER

1980s Richard Rorty suggests that knowledge is more like “conversation” than the representation of reality.

1990s In Consciousness Explained, Quine’s former student Daniel Dennett says that both meaning and inner experience can only be understood as social acts.

Some philosophers assert that language is about the relationship between words and things. Quine, however, disagrees. Language is not about the relationship between objects and verbal signifiers, but about knowing what to say and when to say it. It is, he says in his 1968 essay Ontological Relativity, a social art.

Quine suggests the following thought experiment. Imagine that we come across some people—perhaps natives of another country—who speak a language we do not share. We are sitting with a group of these people when a rabbit appears, and one of the natives says “gavagai.” We wonder if there can be a connection between the event—the appearance of the rabbit—and the fact that the native says “gavagai.” As time goes on, we note that every time a rabbit appears, somebody says “gavagai”, so we conclude that “gavagai” can be reliably translated as rabbit. But, Quine insists, we are wrong. “Gavagai” could mean all manner of things. It could mean “oh, look, dinner!” for example, or it could mean “behold, a fluffy creature!”

If we wanted to determine the meaning of “gavagai”, we could try another method. We could point to other fluffy creatures (or other things on the dinner menu) and see if our utterance of “gavagai” met with assent or dissent. But even if we were to reach a position where, in each and every occasion on which “gavagai” was uttered, we ourselves would utter the word “rabbit”, we still could not be sure that this was an appropriate translation. “Gavagai” could mean “set of rabbit parts” or “wood-living rabbit” or “rabbit or hare”; it might even refer to a short prayer that must be uttered whenever a rabbit is seen.

Unsettled language

In attempting to establish the precise meaning of this mysterious “gavagai”, therefore, we might think that the solution would be to learn the language of our informants thoroughly, so that we could be absolutely sure of the contexts in which the word was spoken. But this would only result in multiplying the problem, because we could not be sure that the other words we found ourselves using to explain the meaning of “gavagai” were themselves accurate translations.

Quine refers to this problem as the “indeterminacy of translation”, and it has unsettling implications. It suggests that ultimately words do not have meanings. The sense of somebody uttering “gavagai” (or, for that matter, “rabbit”), and of this utterance being meaningful comes not from some mysterious link between words and things, but from the patterns of our behavior, and the fact that we have learned to participate in language as a social art.

No word has a fixed meaning, according to Quine. When the word “rabbit” is spoken, it may mean any one of a number of things, depending on the context in which it is said.

WILLARD VAN ORMAN QUINE

Born in 1908 in Ohio, USA, Quine studied at Harvard with Alfred North Whitehead, a philosopher of logic and mathematics. While there he also met Bertrand Russell, who was to become a profound influence on his thought. After completing his PhD in 1932, Quine traveled throughout Europe, meeting many of its most eminent philosophers, including several of the Vienna Circle.

Returning to teach at Harvard, Quine’s philosophical career was briefly interrupted during World War II when he spent four years decrypting messages for the US Navy intelligence. A great traveler, he was said to be prouder of the fact that he had visited 118 countries than of his many awards and fellowships. Quine became professor of philosophy at Harvard in 1956, and taught there until his death in 2000, aged 92.

Key works

1952 Methods of Logic

1953 From a Logical Point of View

1960 Word and Object

1990 The Pursuit of Truth

See also: Plato • Søren Kierkegaard • Ferdinand de Saussure • Ludwig Wittgenstein • Roland Barthes • Daniel Dennett
