IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Analytic philosophy

BEFORE

1651 In his book Leviathan, Thomas Hobbes considers the relationship between freedom and state power.

1844 Søren Kierkegaard argues that our freedom to make moral decisions is a chief cause of unhappiness.

1859 In his book On Liberty, John Stuart Mill distinguishes between freedom from coercion and freedom to act.

1941 Psychoanalyst Erich Fromm explores positive and negative liberty in his book The Fear of Freedom.

AFTER

Present day The development of new surveillance technology raises fresh questions about the nature of freedom.

What does it mean to be free? This is the question explored by the British philosopher Isaiah Berlin in his famous essay Two Concepts of Liberty, written in 1958. Here he makes a distinction between what he calls “positive” and “negative” freedom. Although he is not the first to draw this distinction, he does so with great originality, and uses it to expose apparent inconsistencies in our everyday notion of freedom.

For Berlin, “negative” freedom is what he calls our “fundamental sense” of freedom. This kind of freedom is freedom from external obstacles: I am free because I am not chained to a rock, because I am not in prison, and so on. This is freedom from something else. But Berlin points out that when we talk about freedom, we usually mean something more subtle than this. Freedom is also a matter of self-determination, of being a person with hopes, and intentions, and purposes that are one’s own. This “positive” freedom is about being in control of one’s own destiny. After all, I am not free just because all the doors of my house are unlocked. And this positive freedom is not exclusively personal, because self-determination can also be desired at the level of the group or of the state.

For Berlin, the problem is that these two forms of freedom are often in conflict. Think, for example, of the freedom that comes from the discipline of learning how to play the tuba. As a beginner, I can do little more than struggle with my own inability to play—but eventually I can play with a kind of liberated gusto. Or think of the fact that people frequently exercise their “positive” freedom by voting for a particular government, knowing that their “negative” freedom will be restricted when that government comes to power.

The goals of life

Berlin points to another problem. Who is to say what a suitable goal of “positive” freedom should be? Authoritarian or totalitarian regimes often have an inflexible view of the purpose of human life, and so restrict “negative” freedoms to maximize their idea of human happiness. Indeed, political oppression frequently arises from an abstract idea of what the good life is, followed by state intervention to make that idea a reality.

Berlin’s response to this is twofold. First, it is important to recognize that the various freedoms we may desire will always be in conflict, for there is no such thing as “the goal of life”—only the goals of particular individuals. This fact, he claims, is obscured by philosophers who look for a universal basis for morality, but confuse “right action” with the purpose of life itself. Second, we need to keep alive the fundamental sense of freedom as an absence of “bullying and domination”, so that we do not find our ideals turning into chains for ourselves and for others.

Soviet propaganda often depicted workers liberated from capitalism. From a capitalist view, however, such images showed a triumph of negative freedom over positive freedom.

ISAIAH BERLIN

Isaiah Berlin was born in Riga, Latvia, in 1909. He spent the first part of his life in Russia, firstly under the Russian empire, and then under the rule of the new Communist state. Due to rising anti-Semitism, however, and problems with the Soviet régime, his family emigrated to Britain in 1921. Berlin was an outstanding student at Oxford University, where he remained as a lecturer. He was a philosopher with broad interests, ranging from art and literature to politics. His essay Two Concepts of Liberty was delivered in 1958 at Oxford University, and it is often considered one of the classics of 20th-century political theory. He is celebrated for being one of the foremost scholars of liberalism.

Key works

1953 The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History

1958 Two Concepts of Liberty

1990 The Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas

2000 The Power of Ideas

2006 Political Ideas in the Romantic Age

See also: Jean-Jacques Rousseau • John Stuart Mill • Søren Kierkegaard • Karl Marx • Jean-Paul Sartre
