IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Environmental philosophy

BEFORE

c. 1660 Benedictus Spinoza develops his philosophy of nature as an extension of God.

1949 Aldo Leopold’s The Sand County Almanac is published.

1960 British scientist James Lovelock first proposes his “Gaia hypothesis”, exploring the natural world as a single, self-regulating system.

1962 American biologist Rachel Carson publishes Silent Spring, which becomes an important influence on Naess’s thinking.

AFTER

1984 Zen master and teacher Robert Aitken Roshi combines deep ecology with the ideas of the Japanese Buddhist philosopher D¯ogen.

The injunction to think like a mountain has become closely associated with the concept of “deep ecology”—a term coined in 1973 by the Norwegian philosopher and environmental campaigner, Arne Naess. He uses the term to stress his belief that we must first recognize we are part of nature, and not separate from it, if we are to avoid environmental catastrophe. But the notion of thinking like a mountain goes back to 1949, when it was expressed by American ecologist Aldo Leopold in The Sand County Almanac.

Working as a forester in New Mexico in the early part of the 20th century, Leopold shot a female wolf on the mountainside. “We reached the old wolf in time to watch a fierce green fire dying in her eyes,” he wrote. “I realized then, and have known ever since, that there was something new to me in those eyes—something known only to her and to the mountain.” It was from this experience that Leopold came to the idea that we should think like a mountain, recognizing not just our needs or those of our fellow humans, but those of the entire natural world. He implies that often we miss the broader implications of our actions, only considering the immediate benefits to ourselves. To “think like a mountain” means identifying with the wider environment and being aware of its role in our lives.

"The thinking for the future has to be loyal to nature."

Arne Naess

Harmonizing with nature

Naess takes up Leopold’s idea by proposing his “deep ecology.” He states that we only protect our environment by undergoing the kind of transformation of which Leopold writes. Naess urges us to move toward seeing ourselves as part of the whole biosphere. Instead of viewing the world with a kind of detachment, we must find our place in nature, by acknowledging the intrinsic value of all elements of the world we inhabit.

Naess introduces the “ecological self”, a sense of self that is rooted in an awareness of our relationship to a “larger community of all living beings.” He claims that broadening our identification with the world to include wolves, frogs, spiders, and perhaps even mountains, leads to a more joyful and meaningful life.

Naess’s “deep ecology” has had a powerful effect on environmental philosophy and on the development of environmental activism. For those of us who live in cities, it may seem hard or even impossible to connect with an “ecological self.” Nevertheless, it may be possible. As the Zen master Robert Aitken Roshi wrote in 1984, “When one thinks like a mountain, one thinks also like the black bear, so that honey dribbles down your fur as you catch the bus to work.”

The natural world, for Naess, is not something that we should strive to control and manipulate for our own gain. Living well involves living as an equal with all the elements of our environment.

ARNE NAESS

Widely acknowledged as the leading Norwegian philosopher of the 20th century, Arne Naess became the youngest-ever full professor at the University of Oslo at the age of 27. He was also a noted mountaineer and led a successful expedition to the summit of Tirich Mir in northern Pakistan in 1950.

It was only after Naess retired from his teaching post in 1970 that he actively developed his thinking about the natural world and became involved in direct action on environmental issues. In 1970, he chained himself to the rocks by the Mardalsfossen Waterfall in Norway to protest against the building of a nearby dam. Elected as chairperson of Greenpeace Norway in 1988, he was knighted in 2005.

Key works

1968 Scepticism

1974 Ecology, Society and Lifestyle

1988 Thinking Like a Mountain (with John Seed, Pat Fleming and Joanna Macy)

2002 Life’s Philosophy: Reason and Feeling in a Deeper World

See also: Laozi • Benedictus Spinoza • Friedrich Schelling
