IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of language

APPROACH

Semiotics

BEFORE

380 BCE Plato’s Symposium is the first sustained philosophical discussion of love in the West.

4th century CE St Augustine of Hippo writes extensively on the nature of love.

1916 Ferdinand de Saussure’s Course in General Linguistics establishes modern semiotics and the study of language as a series of signs.

1966 French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan looks at the relationship between Alcibiades, Socrates, and Agathon in his Écrits.

AFTER

1990s Julia Kristeva explores the relationship between love, semiotics, and psychoanalysis.

T he strangest, but most popular, book written by philosopher and literary critic Roland Barthes is A Lover’s Discourse. As the French title, Fragments d’un discours amoureux, suggests, this is a book told in fragments and snapshots, somewhat like the essay One-Way Street by the German philosopher Walter Benjamin. A Lover’s Discourse is not so much a book of philosophy as it is a love story; but it is a love story without any real story. There are no characters, and there is nothing in the way of a plot. There are only the reflections of a lover in what Barthes calls “extreme solitude.”

At the very beginning of the book, Barthes makes clear that a plot is not possible, because the solitary thoughts of a lover come in outbursts that are often contradictory and lack any clear order. As a lover, Barthes suggests, I might even find myself plotting against myself. The lover is somebody who might be affectionately described as having “lost the plot.” So instead of using a plot, or narrative, Barthes arranges his book like an extraordinary encyclopaedia of contradictory and disordered outbursts, any of which might serve as the point the reader might suddenly exclaim, “That’s so true! I recognize that scene…”

The language of love

It is in this context that Barthes suggests “language is a skin.” Language, at least the language of the lover, is not something that simply talks about the world in a neutral fashion, but it is something that, as Barthes says, “trembles with desire.” Barthes writes of how “I rub my language against the other. It is as if I had words instead of fingers, or fingers at the tip of my words.” Even if I write cool, detached philosophy about love, Barthes claims, there is buried in my philosophical coolness a secret address to a particular person, an object of my desire, even if this somebody is “a phantom or a creature still to come.”

Barthes gives an example of this secret address (although not, it should be said, in the context of a particularly detached philosophical discussion) from Plato’s dialogue, The Symposium. This is an account of a discussion on the subject of love that takes place in the house of the poet Agathon. A statesman called Alcibiades turns up to the discussion both late and drunk, and sits down on a couch with Agathon and the philosopher Socrates. The drunken speech he gives is full of praise for Socrates, but it is Agathon that Alcibiades desires; it is against Agathon, so to speak, that Alcibiades’ language is rubbing.

But what of the language that we use when talking of other things? Is only the lover’s language a skin that trembles with hidden desire, or is this also true of other types of language? Barthes does not tell us, leaving us to consider the idea for ourselves.

"Every lover is mad."

Roland Barthes

The lover’s language is like a skin, says Barthes, which is inhabits by the lover. Its words are able to move the beloved—and only the beloved—in an almost physical or tactile way.

ROLAND BARTHES

Barthes was born in Cherbourg, France, in 1915. He attended the University of Sorbonne in Paris from 1935, graduating in 1939, but by this time he had already contracted the tuberculosis that would afflict him for the remainder of his life. His illness made it difficult to acquire teaching qualifications, but it exempted him from military service during World War II. After the war, having finally qualified as a teacher, he taught in France, Romania, and Egypt. He returned to live in France full time in 1952, and there started to write the pieces that were collected together and published under the title Mythologies in 1957.

Barthes’ reputation grew steadily through the 1960s, in France and internationally, and he taught both at home and abroad. He died at the age of 64, when he was run over by a laundry van after lunching with President Mitterrand.

Key works

1957 Mythologies

1973 The Pleasure of the Text

1977 A Lover’s Discourse

See also: Plato • St Augustine of Hippo • Ferdinand de Saussure • Walter Benjamin • Jacques Derrida • Julia Kristeva
