IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of science

APPROACH

Analytic philosophy

BEFORE

4th century BCE Aristotle defines human beings as “political animals”, suggesting that not only are we natural beings, but that the creation of culture is a part of our nature.

1st century BCE Roman poet Titus Lucretius Carus writes On the Nature of the Universe, exploring the natural roots of human culture.

1859 Naturalist Charles Darwin publishes On the Origin of Species, arguing that all life has evolved through a process of natural selection.

AFTER

1980s onward Richard Dawkins and Mary Midgley debate the implications of Darwinism for our view of human nature.

In her book Beast and Man, published in 1978, the British philosopher Mary Midgley assesses the impact the natural sciences have on our understanding of human nature. It is often claimed that the findings of the sciences, particularly those of palaeontology and evolutionary biology, undermine our views of what it is to be human. Midgley wants to address these fears, and she does so by stressing both the things that set us apart from other animals and the things that we share with the rest of the animal kingdom.

One of the questions that she tackles is that of the relationship between nature and culture in human life. Her concern is to address the fact that many people see nature and culture as somehow opposed, as if culture is something non-natural that is added onto our animal natures.

Midgley disagrees with the idea that culture is something of a wholly different order to nature. Instead, she wants to argue that culture is a natural phenomenon. In other words, we have evolved to be the kinds of creatures who have cultures. It could be said that we spin culture as naturally as spiders spin webs. If this is so, then we can no more do without culture than a spider can do without its web: our need for culture is both innate and natural. In this way, Midgley hopes both to account for human uniqueness, and also to put us in the larger context of our evolutionary past.

"We mistakenly cut ourselves off from other animals, trying not to believe we have an animal nature."

Mary Midgley

See also: Plato • Aristotle • Ludwig Wittgenstein
