IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of science

APPROACH

History of science

BEFORE

1543 Nicolaus Copernicus publishes On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, leading to a paradigm shift in our view of the solar system.

1934 In The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Karl Popper defines “falsifiability” as a criterion for science.

AFTER

1975 Paul Feyerabend writes Against Method, advocating “epistemological anarchism.”

1976 In Proofs and Refutations, Imre Lakatos brings together Karl Popper’s “falsificationism” and the work of Kuhn.

Today Rival interpretations of quantum phenomena yield rival paradigms of the subatomic world.

American physicist and historian of science Thomas Kuhn is best known for his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, published in 1962. The book is both an exploration of turning points in the history of science and an attempt to set out a theory of how revolutions in science take place.

Paradigm shifts

Science, in Kuhn’s view, alternates between periods of “normal science” and periods of “crisis.” Normal science is the routine process by which scientists working within a theoretical framework—or “paradigm”—accumulate results that do not call the theoretical underpinnings of their framework into question. Sometimes, of course, anomalous, or unfamiliar, results are encountered, but these are usually considered to be errors on the part of the scientists concerned—proof, according to Kuhn, that normal science does not aim at novelties. Over time, however, anomalous results can accumulate until a crisis point is reached. Following the crisis, if a new theory has been formulated, there is a shift in the paradigm, and the new theoretical framework replaces the old. Eventually this framework is taken for granted, and normal science resumes—until further anomalies arise. An example of such a shift was the shattering of the classical view of space and time following the confirmation of Einstein’s theories of relativity.

Nicolaus Copernicus’s claim that Earth orbits the Sun was a revolution in scientific thinking. It led to scientists abandoning the belief that our planet is at the center of the universe.

See also: Francis Bacon • Rudolf Carnap • Karl Popper • Paul Feyerabend • Richard Rorty
