IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Philosophy of science

APPROACH

Analytic philosophy

BEFORE

1934 In The Logic of Scientific Discovery, Karl Popper defines “falsifiability” as a criterion for any scientific theory.

1962 Thomas Kuhn introduces the idea of “paradigm shifts” in science in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.

1960s and early 1970s Feyerabend develops his ideas in discussion with his friend and fellow philosopher of science, Imre Lakatos.

AFTER

From 1980s Feyerabend’s ideas contribute to the theories of the mind proposed by American philosophers Patricia and Paul Churchland.

Born in Austria, Feyerabend became a student of Karl Popper at the London School of Economics, but he went on to depart significantly from Popper’s rational model of science. During his time at the University of California in the 1960s and 1970s, Feyerabend became friendly with the German-born philosopher Thomas Kuhn, who argued that scientific progress is not gradual, but always jumps in “paradigm shifts” or revolutions that lead to whole new frameworks for scientific thinking. Feyerabend goes even further, suggesting that when this occurs, all the scientific concepts and terms are altered, so there is no permanent framework of meaning.

Anarchy in science

Feyerabend’s most famous book Against Method: Outline of an Anarchistic Theory of Knowledge, was first published in 1975. Here he sets out his vision of what he calls “epistemological anarchism.” Epistemology is the branch of philosophy that deals with questions and theories about knowledge, and Feyerabend’s “anarchism” is rooted in the idea that all of the methodologies used in the sciences are limited in scope. As a result, there is no such thing as “scientific method.” If we look at how science has developed and progressed in practice, the only “method” that we can discern is that “anything goes.” Science, Feyerabend maintains, has never progressed according to strict rules, and if the philosophy of science demands such rules, it will limit scientific progress.

"Science and myth overlap in many ways."

Paul Feyerabend

See also: Karl Popper • Thomas Kuhn
