IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Postmodernism

BEFORE

1870s The term “postmodern” is first used in the context of art criticism.

1939–45 Technological advances in World War II lay the ground for the computer revolution of the 20th century.

1953 Ludwig Wittgenstein writes in his Philosophical Investigations about “language games”—an idea that Lyotard uses to develop his idea of meta-narratives.

AFTER

1984 American literary critic Fredric Jameson writes Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.

From 1990s The World Wide Web offers unprecedented access to information.

The idea that knowledge is produced to be sold appears in Jean-François Lyotard’s book The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge. The book was originally written for the Council of Universities in Quebec, Canada, and the use of the term “postmodern” in its title is significant. Although Lyotard did not invent the term, which had been used by various art critics since the 1870s, his book was responsible for broadening its range and increasing its popularity. His use of the word in the title of this book is often said to mark the beginning of postmodern thought.

The term “postmodernism” has since been used in so many different ways that it is now hard to know exactly what it means, but Lyotard’s definition is very clear. Postmodernism, he writes, is a matter of “incredulity towards meta-narratives.” Meta-narratives are overarching, single stories that attempt to sum up the whole of human history, or that attempt to put all of our knowledge into a single framework. Marxism (the view that history can be seen as a series of struggles between social classes) is an example of a meta-narrative. Another is the idea that humanity’s story is one of progress toward deeper knowledge and social justice, brought about by greater scientific understanding.

Externalized knowledge

Our incredulity toward these meta- narratives implies a new scepticism. Lyotard suggests that this is due to a shift in the way we have related to knowledge since World War II, and to the huge change in the technologies we use to deal with it. Computers have fundamentally transformed our attitudes, as knowledge has become information that can be stored in databases, moved to and fro, and bought and sold. This is what Lyotard calls the “mercantilization” of knowledge.

This has several implications. The first, Lyotard points out, is that knowledge is becoming externalized. It is no longer something that helps toward the development of minds; something that might be able to transform us. Knowledge is also becoming disconnected from questions of truth. It is being judged not in terms of how true it is, but in terms of how well it serves certain ends. When we cease to ask questions about knowledge such as “is it true?” and start asking questions such as “how can this be sold?”, knowledge becomes a commodity. Lyotard is concerned that once this happens, private corporations may begin to seek to control the flow of knowledge, and decide who can access what types of knowledge, and when.

When knowledge becomes data it is no longer the indefinable matter of minds, but a commodity that can be transferred, stored, bought, or sold.

JEAN-FRANÇOIS LYOTARD

Jean-François Lyotard was born in Versailles, France in 1924. He studied philosophy and literature at the Sorbonne, Paris, becoming friends with Gilles Deleuze. After graduating, he taught philosophy in schools for several years in France and Algeria.

Lyotard became involved in radical left-wing politics in the 1950s, and was a well-known defender of the 1954–62 Algerian revolution, but his philosophical development ultimately led him to become disillusioned with the meta-narratives of Marxism. In the 1970s he began working as a university professor, teaching philosophy first at the Sorbonne and then in many other countries around the world, including the US, Canada, Brazil, and France. Lyotard retired as Professor Emeritus at the University of Paris VIII, and died of leukemia in 1998.

Key works

1971 Discourse, Figure

1974 Libidinal Economy

1979 The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge

1983 The Differend

See also: Immanuel Kant • Georg Hegel • Friedrich Nietzsche • Ludwig Wittgenstein • Martin Heidegger • Gilles Deleuze
