IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Existentialism

BEFORE

4th century BCE Aristotle argues in the Nicomachean Ethics that slavery is a natural state.

19th century Africa is partitioned and colonized by European countries.

1930s The French négritude movement calls for a unified black consciousness.

AFTER

1977 Steve Biko, an anti-apartheid activist inspired by Fanon, dies in police custody in South Africa.

1978 Edward Said, influenced by Fanon’s work, writes Orientalism, a post-colonial study of Western perspectives on the Middle East in the 19th century.

P hilosopher and psychiatrist Frantz Fanon first published his psychoanalytic study of colonialism and racism, Black Skin, White Masks, in 1952. In the book Fanon attempts to explore the psychological and social legacy of colonialism among non-white communities around the world.

In saying that “for the black man, there is only one destiny”, and this destiny is white, Fanon is saying at least two things. First, he says that “the black man wants to be like the white man”; that is, the aspirations of many colonized peoples have been formed by the dominant colonial culture. European colonial cultures tended to equate “blackness” with impurity, which shaped the self-view of those who were subject to colonial rule, so that they came to see the color of their skin as a sign of inferiority.

The only way out of this predicament seems to be an aspiration to achieve a “white existence”; but this will always fail, because the fact of having dark skin will always mean that one will fail to be accepted as white. For Fanon, this aspiration to achieve “a white existence” not only fails to address racism and inequality, but it also masks or even condones these things by implying that there is an “unarguable superiority” to white existence.

At the same time, Fanon is saying something more complex. It might be thought that, given this tendency to aspire to a kind of “white existence”, the solution would be to argue for an independent view of what it means to be black. Yet this, too, is subject to all kinds of problems. Elsewhere in his book, Fanon writes that “the black man’s soul is a white man’s artefact.” In other words, the idea of what it means to be black is the creation of patterns of fundamentally racist European thought.

Here Fanon is, in part, responding to what was known in France as the négritude (or “blackness”) movement. This was a movement of French and French-speaking black writers from the 1930s who wanted to reject the racism and colonialism of mainstream French culture, and argued for an independent, shared black culture. But Fanon believes that this idea of négritude is one that fails to truly address the problems of racism that it seeks to overcome, because the way that it thinks about “blackness” simply repeats the fantasies of mainstream white culture.

"There is a fact: White men consider themselves superior to black men."

Frantz Fanon

Human rights

In one sense, Fanon believes that the solution can only come when we move beyond racial thinking; that if we remain trapped within the idea of race we cannot ever address these injustices. “I find myself in the world and I recognize that I have one right alone,” Fanon writes at the end of his book; “that of demanding human behavior from the other.” Fanon’s thought has been of widespread importance in anti-colonial and anti-racist movements, and has influenced social activists such as anti-apartheid campaigner Steve Biko and scholars such as Edward Said.

The inferiority associated with being black led many colonized people to adopt the “mother country’s cultural standards”, says Fanon, and even to aspire to a “white existence.”

FRANTZ FANON

Frantz Fanon was born in 1925 in Martinique, a Caribbean island that was at that time a French colony. He left Martinique to fight with the Free French Forces in World War II, after which he studied both medicine and psychiatry in Lyon, France. He also attended lectures on literature and philosophy, including those given by the philosopher Merleau-Ponty. The young Fanon had thought of himself as French, and the racism he encountered on first entering France surprised him. It played a huge role in shaping his philosophy, and one year after qualifying as a psychiatrist in 1951, he published his book Black Skin, White Masks.

In 1953 Fanon moved to Algeria where he worked as a hospital psychiatrist. After two years of hearing his patients’ tales of the torture they endured during the 1954–62 Algerian War of Independence, he resigned his government-funded post, moved to Tunisia, and began working for the Algerian independence movement. In the late 1950s, he developed leukemia. During his illness, he wrote his final book, The Wretched of the Earth, arguing for a different world. It was published in the year of his death with a preface by Jean-Paul Sartre, a friend who had first influenced Fanon, then been influenced by him.

Key works

1952 Black Skin, White Masks

1959 A Dying Colonialism

1961 The Wretched of the Earth

1969 Toward the African Revolution (collected short works)

See also: Aristotle • Jean-Paul Sartre • Maurice Merleau-Ponty • Edward Said
