IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Universalism

BEFORE

c.380 BCE In The Republic, Plato claims that many of us live in a world of illusion.

1739 David Hume publishes A Treatise of Human Nature. Though an empiricist, he claims that there must be some fixed principles from which morality derives.

1785 Immanuel Kant, in his Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals, argues that morality should be based on universality.

Early 20th century John Dewey argues that politics is the shadow cast on society by big business.

1971 John Rawls revives Kant’s notion of universality in his A Theory of Justice.

Although originally famous for his work in linguistics, Noam Chomsky is today best known for his analyses of political power. Since the publication of his first political book, American Power and the New Mandarins, in 1969, he has claimed that there is often a mismatch between the way that states exert power and the rhetorical claims that they make. He maintains that rhetorical claims by governments are not by themselves sufficient for us to reach the truth about political power. Governments may speak the language of “facts” as a way of justifying their actions, but unless their claims are supported by evidence, then they are only illusions, and the actions to which they lead lack justification. If we are to understand more clearly how states operate, it is necessary to move beyond the battle between rival forms of rhetoric, and instead to look at history, at institutional structures, at official policy documents, and so forth.

"States are not moral agents; people are."

Noam Chomsky

Ethics and universality

Chomsky’s ethical analyses are based on what he calls the “principle of universality.” At root, this principle is relatively simple. It says that at the very least we should apply to ourselves the same standards that we apply to others. This is a principle that Chomsky claims has always been central to any responsible system of ethics. The central psychological insight here is that we are fond of using ethical language as a way of protesting about others, but that we are less inclined to pass judgment on ourselves. Nevertheless, if we claim to uphold any set of ethical or moral standards, and if we wish to be consistent, then we must apply to others the standards we apply to ourselves. In terms of government, this means that we must analyze our political actions rigorously, instead of allowing ourselves to be blinded by rhetoric.

This is both a moral and an intellectual imperative. For Chomsky, these are closely related. He points out that if anyone making a moral claim is also violating universality, then their claim cannot be taken seriously and should be rejected.

If we are to cut through the rhetoric and examine political morality in a rigorous fashion, it seems that universality is a necessary starting point. Some of Chomsky’s specific claims about the nature of global power have caused considerable controversy, but this does not invalidate his central insight. For if we wish to call his specific claims into question, then we should do so in the light of universality and of all the available evidence. If his claims turn out to be false, then they should be rejected or modified; but if they turn out to be true, then they should be acted upon.

Uncle Sam, the personification of the United States, is one of countless props used by governments to foster public support. Chomsky warns that such images can distract us from the truth.

NOAM CHOMSKY

Chomsky was born in 1928 in Pennsylvania, USA, and was raised in a multilingual Jewish household. He studied mathematics, philosophy, and linguistics at the University of Pennsylvania, where he wrote a groundbreaking thesis on philosophical linguistics. In 1957, his book Syntactic Structures secured his reputation as one of the leading figures in linguistics, and revolutionized the field.

Although continuing to teach and publish in linguistics, Chomsky became increasingly involved in politics. He was a prominent opponent of the Vietnam War, which prompted him to publish his critique of US intellectual culture, The Responsibility of Intellectuals, in 1967. Today, he continues to write and lecture on linguistics, philosophy, politics, and international affairs.

Key works

1967 The Responsibility of Intellectuals

1969 American Power and the New Mandarins

2001 9-11

2006 Failed States: The Abuse of Power and the Assault on Democracy

See also: Plato • David Hume • Immanuel Kant • John Dewey • John Rawls
