IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Social theory

BEFORE

1789 The French Revolution begins, marking the end of a “representational” power structure in France.

1791 Jeremy Bentham writes Of Publicity, an early exploration of the idea of the “public.”

1842 Karl Marx writes his essay On Freedom of the Press.

AFTER

1986 Edward Said criticizes Habermas and the Frankfurt School for their Eurocentric views and their silence on racist theory and imperialism.

1999 Canadian author Naomi Klein’s No Logo explores the fate of the public sphere in an era dominated by advertising and the mass media.

According to the German philosopher Jürgen Habermas, modern society depends not only on technological advances, but also upon our ability to criticize and reason collectively about our own traditions. Reason, says Habermas, lies at the heart of our everyday communications. Somebody says or does something, and we say, “Why did you do that?” or “Why did you say that?” We continually ask for justifications, which is why Habermas talks about “communicative” reason. Reason, for him, is not about discovering abstract truths, but about the need we have to justify ourselves to others.

Creating a public sphere

In the 1960s and 1970s, Habermas concluded that there was a link between communicative reason and what he calls the “public sphere.” Up until the 18th century, he states, European culture was largely “representational”, meaning that the ruling classes sought to “represent” themselves to their subjects with displays of power that required no justification, such as impressive pageants or grand architectural projects. But in the 18th century, a variety of public spaces emerged that were outside state control, including literary salons and coffee houses. These were places where individuals could gather to engage in conversation or reasoned debate. This growth of the public sphere led to increased opportunities to question the authority of representational state culture. The public sphere became a “third space”, a buffer between the private space of our immediate friends and family, and the space occupied by state control.

By establishing a public sphere, we also open up more opportunities for recognizing that we have interests in common with other private individuals—interests that the state may fail to serve. This can lead to questioning the actions of the state. Habermas believes that the growth of the public sphere helped to trigger the French Revolution in 1789.

The expansion of the public sphere, from the 18th century onward, has led to a growth of democratically elected political institutions, independent courts, and bills of rights. But Habermas believes that many of these brakes on the arbitrary use of power are now under threat. Newspapers, for example, can offer opportunities for reasoned dialogue between private individuals, but if the press is controlled by large corporations, such opportunities may diminish. Informed debate on issues of substance is replaced with celebrity gossip, and we are transformed from critical, rational agents into mindless consumers.

Coffee houses became a focus of social and political life in the major cities of 18th-century Europe. Noted as places where “the dissaffected met”, attempts were frequently made to close them.

JÜRGEN HABERMAS

Jürgen Habermas grew up in Germany under the Nazi regime. His realization that “we had been living in a criminal system”, following the Nuremburg trials (1945–46), was to have a lasting effect on his philosophy.

On completing his doctorate in 1954, he studied with members of the Frankfurt School, including Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno. During the 1960s and 1970s, he lectured at universities in Bonn and Gottingen. In 1982, he became Professor of Philosophy at the University at Frankfurt, where he taught until his retirement in 1993. More recently, Habermas has himself taken an active role in the public sphere, entering into debates on Holocaust denial and global terrorism.

Key works

1962 The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere

1981 The Theory of Communicative Action

1985 The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity

2005 Between Naturalism and Religion

See also: Jeremy Bentham • Karl Marx • Theodor Adorno • Edgar Morin • Niklas Luhmann • Noam Chomsky • Edward Said
