IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Feminism

BEFORE

1792 Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of the Rights of Woman first initiates serious debate about the place of women in society.

1890s Austrian psychologist Sigmund Freud establishes his psychoanalytic method, which will greatly influence Irigaray’s work.

1949 Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex explores the implications of sexual difference.

AFTER

1993 Luce Irigaray turns to non-Western modes of thought about sexual difference in An Ethics of Sexual Difference.

The Belgian philosopher and analyst Luce Irigaray is concerned above all else with the idea of sexual difference. A former student of Jacques Lacan, a psychoanalyst who famously explored the linguistic structure of the unconscious, Irigaray claims that all language is essentially masculine in nature.

In Sex and Genealogies (1993) she writes: “Everywhere, in everything, men’s speech, men’s values, dreams, and desires are law.” Irigaray’s feminist work can be seen as a struggle to find authentically female ways of speaking and desiring that are free from male-centeredness.

"One must assume the feminine role deliberately."

Luce Irigaray

Wisdom and desire

To address this problem, Irigaray suggests that all thinking—even the most apparently sober and objective-sounding philosophy, with its talk of wisdom, certainty, rectitude, and moderation—is underpinned by desire. In failing to acknowledge the desire that underpins it, traditional male-centered philosophy has also failed to acknowledge that beneath its apparent rationality simmer all manner of irrational impulses.

Irigaray suggests that each sex has its own relationship to desire, and as a result each sex has a relation to madness. This calls into question the long tradition of equating maleness with this rationality, and femaleness with irrationality. It also opens the way to the possibility of new ways of writing and thinking about philosophy, for both men and women.

See also: Mary Wollstonecraft • Ludwig Wittgenstein • Simone de Beauvoir • Hélène Cixous • Julia Kristeva
