IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Epistemology

APPROACH

Feminism

BEFORE

1949 Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex explores the philosophical implications of sexual difference.

1962 French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss writes The Savage Mind, a study of binary oppositions in culture.

1967 Controversial French philosopher Jacques Derrida publishes Of Grammatology, introducing the concept of deconstruction, which Cixous uses in her study of gender.

AFTER

1970s The French literary movement of écriture féminine (“women’s writing”) explores appropriate use of language in feminist thinking, taking its inspiration from Cixous.

In 1975, the French poet, novelist, playwright, and philosopher Hélène Cixous wrote Sorties, her influential exploration of the oppositions that often define the way we think about the world. For Cixous, a thread that runs through centuries of thought is our tendency to group elements of our world into opposing pairs, such as culture/nature, day/night, and head/heart. Cixous claims that these pairs of elements are always by implication ranked hierarchically, underpinned by a tendency to see one element as being dominant or superior and associated with maleness and activity, while the other element or weaker aspect is associated with femaleness and passivity.

Time for change

Cixous believes that the authority of this hierarchical pattern of thinking is now being called into question by a new blossoming of feminist thought. She questions what the implications of this change might be, not only for our philosophical systems, but also for our social and political institutions. Cixous herself, however, refuses to play the game of setting up binary oppositions, of victors and losers, as a structural framework for our thinking. Instead she conjures up the image of “millions of species of mole as yet not recognized”, tunnelling away under the edifices of our world view. And what will happen when these edifices start to crumble? Cixous does not say. It is as if she is telling us that we can make no assumptions, that the only thing we can do is wait and see.

"Woman must write herself and bring woman into literature."

Hélène Cixous

See also: Mary Wollstonecraft • Simone de Beauvoir • Jacques Derrida • Julia Kristeva • Martha Nussbaum
