IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Feminism

BEFORE

1792 Mary Wollstonecraft’s A Vindication of the Rights of Woman initiates serious debate about the nature of the roles women are conditioned to play in society.

1807 Georg Hegel explores the dialectic between “master” and “slave” in Phenomenology of Spirit.

1949 Simone de Beauvoir’s The Second Sex is published, rapidly becoming a key text in the French feminist movement.

AFTER

1997 In their book Fashionable Nonsense, physics professors Alan Sokal and Jean Bricmont criticize Kristeva’s misuse of scientific language.

Bulgarian-born philosopher and psychoanalyst Julia Kristeva is often regarded as one of the leading voices in French feminism. Nevertheless, the question of whether, or in what way, Kristeva is a feminist thinker has been subject to considerable debate. Part of the reason for this is that for Kristeva herself, the very notion of feminism is problematic. Feminism has arisen out of the conflict women have had with the structures that are associated with male dominance or power. Because of these roots, Kristeva warns, feminism carries with it some of the same male-centered presuppositions that it is seeking to question.

If the feminist movement is to realize its goals fully, Kristeva believes that it is essential for it to be more self-critical. She warns that by seeking to fight what she calls the “power principle” of a male-dominated world, feminism is at risk of adopting yet another form of this principle. Kristeva is convinced that for any movement to be successful in achieving true emancipation, it must constantly question its relationship to power and established social systems—and, if necessary “renounce belief in its own identity.” If the feminist movement fails to take these steps, Kristeva fears that it is in serious danger of developing into little more than an additional strand in the ongoing game of power.

Margaret Thatcher, like many women who have achieved positions of great power, modified her public image to incorporate classic male concepts of strength and authority.

See also: Mary Wollstonecraft • Georg Hegel • Simone de Beauvoir • Hélène Cixous • Martha Nussbaum
