IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Ethics

APPROACH

Utilitarianism

BEFORE

c.560 BCE Indian sage and Jainist leader Mahavira calls for strict vegetarianism.

1789 Jeremy Bentham sets out the theory of utilitarianism in his book, Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, arguing: “each to count for one, and none for more than one.”

1861 In his book Utilitarianism, John Stuart Mill develops Bentham’s utilitarianism from an approach that considers individual acts to one that considers moral rules.

AFTER

1983 American philosopher Tom Regan publishes The Case for Animal Rights.

The Australian philosopher Peter Singer became known as one of the most active advocates of animal rights following the publication of his book Animal Liberation in 1975. Singer takes a utilitarian approach to ethics, following the tradition developed by Englishman Jeremy Bentham in the late 18th century.

Utilitarianism asks us to judge the moral value of an act by the consequences of that act. For Bentham, the way to do this is by calculating the sum of pleasure or pain that results from our actions, like a mathematical equation.

Animals are sentient beings

Singer’s utilitarianism is based on what he refers to as an “equal consideration of interests.” Pain, he says, is pain, whether it is yours or mine or anybody else’s. The extent to which non-human animals can feel pain is the extent to which we should take their interests into account when making decisions that affect their lives, and we should refrain from activities that cause such pain. However, like all utilitarians, Singer applies the “greatest happiness principle”, which says that we should make decisions in such a way that they result in the greatest happiness for the greatest number. Singer points out that he has never said that no experiment on an animal could ever be justified; rather that we should judge all actions by their consequences, and “the interests of animals count among those consequences”; they form part of the equation.

"The value of life is a notoriously difficult ethical question."

Peter Singer

See also: Jeremy Bentham • John Stuart Mill
