IN CONTEXT

BRANCH

Political philosophy

APPROACH

Marxism

BEFORE

1807 Georg Hegel publishes The Phenomenology of the Spirit, laying the groundwork for Marxist thought.

1848 Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels publish their Communist Manifesto.

1867 Marx publishes the first volume of Capital (Das Kapital), a treatise on political economy.

1899 In The Interpretation of Dreams, psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud claims that much of human behavior is driven by unconscious forces.

1966 Psychoanalytical theorist Jacques Lacan, one of Žižek’s major influences, revisits Freud’s ideas in Écrits.

The idea that all the best Marxist analyses have traditionally been analyses of failure appears in an interview with Slovenian philosopher Slavoj Žižek given in 2008. In this interview, Žižek was asked about the events in Czechoslovakia in 1968, when a period of reform, aimed at decentralizing and democratizing the country, was brutally brought to an end by the Soviet Union and its allies.

Žižek’s claim is that the crushing of the reforms became the very thing that later sustained a myth held by the political left—namely that, had the reforms gone ahead, some kind of social and political paradise would have followed. According to Žižek, those on the political left are prone to dwelling on their failures, because doing so allows myths to be generated about what would have happened if they had succeeded. Žižek says that these failures allow those on the left to maintain a “safe moralistic position”, because their failures mean that they are never in power, or truly tested by action. He describes this stance as the “comfortable position of resistance”, which allows an avoidance of the real issues—such as re-evaluating the nature of political revolution. For Žižek, a dedicated Marxist, serious questions about the nature of political power are obscured by endlessly trying to justify utopia’s elusiveness.

The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 led to the end of the short-lived “Prague Spring” period of liberalization. All moves toward democracy were suppressed until 1989.

See also: Immanuel Kant • Georg Hegel • Karl Marx • Martin Heidegger
